MSC1772: Matrix spaces (#1772)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/1772-groups-as-rooms.md

 * Groups are centralised, rather than being existing across multiple
   participating servers.

## Solution

Represent groups by rooms rather than a custom first-class entity.

We reserve aliases which begin with a `+` to represent groups - e.g. the room
for group `+test:example.com` is `#+test:example.com`.

We introduce a `m.room.groups` state event which defines how a room should
behave as a group - i.e. the rooms which it groups together, and any subgroups
nested within it.

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.groups",
    "contents": {
        "rooms": [
            {
                "room": "#room1:example.com",
            },
            {
                "room": "#room2:example.com",
                "autojoin": true
            },
            {
                "room": "#room3:example.com",
            },
        ],
        "subgroups": [
            {
                "group": "+something:example.com",
            },
            {
                "group": "+otherthing:example.com",
            },
        ]
    },
}
```

XXX: alternatively, perhaps all the rooms and subgroups should be their own
state event with a unique state key, ensuring that this can scale to large

> groups and doesn't have to be edited atomically.

Author: i've added an example of how this could look.

Name, Topic, Membership etc share the same events as a normal room.

> The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar.

Reviewer: I'd argue this needs to be done anyway for rooms, and should be part of another proposal. It's a good idea, but not limited to groups.

> The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar.

Reviewer 2: Where do you have tiny favicon style room avatars?

> The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar.

Author: it's very plausible for a client to want dedicated favicon-style icons for both room & group avatars. however, i think this is a job in general for the media repository to let users specify custom resolution thumbnails for an image (and is pretty OT for this MSC)

> The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar.

Author: have opened an issue to track it at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1778

Long description requires a new event: `m.room.description`.  This can also be
used for rooms as well as groups.

Groups may be nested, and membership of groups is defined as the union of the
members of the group room and its subgroups.  If `+top:example.com` has two
subgroups, the user membership of `+top:example.com` is the union of the
subgroups and the group itself.  This allows hierarchies of groups & users to be
defined.

> Clients peek in rooms (recursing into subgroups as needed) in order to determine

Reviewer: I assume the proposal plans to fix peeking over federation, though I cannot remember if that was a problem limited to synapse or the spec.

Reviewer 2: There is a separate proposal for that

Author: #1777

   profile rooms of those users.  However, we can't trust the flair which the
   users advertise on the profile - it has to be cross-referenced from the
   memberships of the groups in question.
   
To do this cross-referencing, options are:

 1. The client checks the group membership (very inefficient, given the server
    could/should do it for them), or...
 2. The server checks the group membership by peeking the group and somehow
    decorates the `m.flair` event as validated before sending it to the client.
    This is also inefficient, as it forces the server to peek a potentially large
    group (unless we extend federation to allow peeking specific state events)
 3. The origin `m.flair` event includes the event_id of the user's
    `m.room.membership` event in the group.  The server performing the check can
    then query this specific event from one of the servers hosting the group-room,
    and we perhaps extend the S2S API to say whether a given state event is current
    considered current_state or not.  If the `m.room.membership` event is confirmed
    as current, then the `m.flair` is decorated as being confirmed.

> Of these, option 3 feels best?

Author: it's a trade-off between special cases and performance. i think the performance hit and complexity of clients having to peek in arbitrary group-rooms every time they need to validate the flair of some random user popping up in their timeline would be catastrophic, relative to having the server handling that transparently for them.

> Of these, option 3 feels best?

Author: hm, if m.flair's auth events included the membership event of the group, it still wouldn't tell you if subsequently the membership had elapsed...

> # Proposal for groups as rooms (take 2)

Reviewer 3: starting a thread here for "what do we call this thing". Synapse currently has a thing called "groups", which Element-Web calls "communities". Another name that has been suggested includes "space".  A mix of names is confusing, and a big problem with the term "group" is that people tend to conflate it with a "room".

Reviewer 4: It might be worthwhile to make a distinction between membership inheritance and groups themselves, in which case, groups would just be rooms with membership inheritance and a few special state events.

Author: > I think I'd just use the terms parent, child, ancestor and descendant on a spec level and let each client decide how to implement and name groups/communities implemented on top of that.

I think this would cause massive UX fragmentation.  This MSC is intended to represent a hierarchy of groups of users/rooms for defining communities of users.

> It might be worthwhile to make a distinction between membership inheritance and groups themselves, in which case, groups would just be rooms with membership inheritance and a few special state events.

I don't think there's any plan for state inheritance here (which would probably be a nightmare in terms of introducing dependencies between state resolution in different rooms).

> starting a thread here for "what do we call this thing".

It's really confusing when we have a different name for something in the protocol and the recommended UI.  My suggestion would be 'communities' to differentiate from the doomed '/groups' API and the confusion that some people think group === room.  I'm unsure about 'spaces' because that focuses on the rooms element rather than the users element, whereas communities spans both.

Rather than bikeshedding the name here, i suggest I work it through with @nadonomy offline.

Reviewer 5: In discord they are called at API-level `guild` and at UI-level `server` (please not server...but guild is worth considering?)

Slack calls them `team` or `workspace`

Reviewer 4: > I don't think there's any plan for state inheritance here (which would probably be a nightmare in terms of introducing dependencies between state resolution in different rooms).

Sorry, I was not suggesting that the state resolution algorithm be changed. I was suggesting changing the meaning of the state after it's resolved; i.e, to change the `auth_events` to allow cross-room references and update the auth rules to recognize membership in another room, provided that the current room has some state saying that the "other room" is a parent group. I would also argue that it's best to separate the UI/UX of groups from the protocol idea of membership inheritance if such an idea was implemented, which what I was trying to say.
That seems to be a more fundamental (and more complicated!) protocol change than what the core spec team seems to be gravitating towards, though, so it may not be relevant.

Reviewer 3: Current thinking within the team is that we will use `space` to describe this concept (hence, this MSC will be 'spaces-as-rooms` :). )

Reasoning includes:
 * "groups" are easily conflated with "rooms"
 * "community" does not all the usecases we have in mind here (eg: private lists of rooms; teams within a company)
 * "space" is a real-world analogy to a "building" which can contain multiple rooms
 * "space" is also used to refer to an area of business: "I'm in the Nuclear Physics space"
 * "space" is like a "workspace" (thanks Slack!) but not necessarily for work :)

It doesn't *have* to match the terms used in the UI, but we are keen to avoid a situation where the protocol and UI use the same word to use different things, which is massively confusing for everyone.

> 

Reviewer 5: > Folks, please remember to use comments on the document itself (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772/files) rather than comments on the PR, to help with threading and tracking which comments have been addressed. I'm going to ignore any comments that have been made on the PR, because it is too hard to follow the discussion, so if you have points that you feel need addressing, please re-make them as comments on the document.

Perhaps it'd be best to switch to https://gitlab.matrix.org/ since this issue plops up on *every* MSC with some discussion? Gitlab allows to reply to comments in a thread, github does not.

Reviewer 3: currently our gitlab doesn't have open signup. So maybe, but let's not discuss it further here.

> This obsoletes [MSC1215](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1215).

Reviewer 5: > I'm writing from the perspective of a client developer using the C/S API.
> 
> In addition to my other review comments, I think there are several features that are missing from this proposal, but would be useful for a community of people who want to use rooms to organise their discussions by topic (e.g. group name "Friend Zone", rooms "chat", "gaming", "art", "comics").
> 
>     * An option to force synchronise group-room membership. If the client joins the group they must also join all its rooms. If they leave a room or the group they must also leave all its other rooms.
> 
>     * An option to synchronise moderators, permissions, and bans. If you ban someone from one room of the community you most likely want to ban them from all rooms. If you deny invite permissions for PL0 on one room of the community you might want to deny it for all rooms.
> 
>     * Static ordering of the rooms list. A community might want to specify their own "natural" order for the rooms to be displayed in, such as rules at the top, then general chat, then more specialised rooms below it. (It's up to the client whether whey want to use that suggested order.)
> 
> 
> In summary, while this proposal definitely _improves_ the situation over current groups as outlined in the problems section, I think it still misses out on a lot of useful features, leaving gaps that would have to either later be filled with more MSCs or addressed in a 3rd-party client which adds features like synchronised bans.
> 
> Let me know if I made mistakes or missed anything obvious. I'd specifically really like clarification regarding the "expected" UX for subgroups.

 
In sorus opinion this could be on a per-room basis:

1. Having a room be a required room: if you join the group, you _must_ also join this room
2. Having a room be exclusive: you can only join this room if you are pat of the group

If all rooms are both required and exclusive you get the described behaviour, but there is practical use for only using them individually. E.g. you might want to make some vent room of a community exclusive, but not required.

You might want to make a room of a group also neither exclusive nor required: E.g. some hacking community having a general help room. Not everyone asking for help cares about all the contents of the group.

Reviewer 6: Thanks for copying that for me. Your response, _if implemented,_ would happily address the first bullet point.

Reviewer 5: > A way to do the first two bullet points could be state inheritance, meaning the member and PL/role objects of all parents a user is subscribed to would be merged to a room if it doesn't have one of its own.

and if it does have an own one? Only have the PLs be overrides? How does this fit in with permission roles?

Reviewer 7: as @ara4n said,
> I don't think there's any plan for state inheritance here (which would probably be a nightmare in terms of introducing dependencies between state resolution in different rooms).

so i'd actually prefer a combination of `recursive` flag and cross-room auth

but for clarification:

> and if it does have an own one?

the idea was that only state types not present in the child get merged to enable both subrooms with and  without shared membership.

another way of thinking about it is that when not finding expected state in a room, you'd walk its tree of known ancestors until you find a branch containing the desired state. (e.g. a branch where the user is joined and their PL is higher than the PL required for sending a message)

> Only have the PLs be overrides?

i think doing this on the entire state could enable building addressable threads on top of this

> How does this fit in with permission roles?

it works the same, 
`state[m.room.power_levels][events][m.room.message] >= state[m.room.power_levels][users][$user]`
just becomes
`|state[m.room.roles][events][m.room.message] ∩ state[m.room.roles][users][$user]| > 0`

actually, in a state-inheritance world those should probably be
`state[m.room.power_levels][events][m.room.message] >= state[m.room.membership][$user][power_level]`
and
`|state[m.room.roles][events][m.room.message] ∩ state[m.room.membership][$user][roles]| > 0`

Reviewer 3: making the event auth rules dependent on state from other rooms (ie, cross-room auth) would be *hugely* complicated, as doing so will require rethinking the state resolution algorithm, which is more than hairy enough as it is. We'll need to find ways to deliver the functionality we want in other ways.

Reviewer 5: > ` state[m.room.power_levels][events][m.room.message] >= state[m.room.membership][$user][power_level]`

Then you couldn't override someone having less permissions, only more?

Reviewer 5: > We'll need to find ways to deliver the functionality we want in other ways.

From a pure information perspective: We want permissions in room 2 depend on room 1. Permissions are in the state. So we want the state of room 2 depend on the state of room 1.

 * There are membership management features which could benefit rooms which
   would also benefit groups and vice versa (e.g. "auditorium mode")
 * The current implementations on Riot Web/iOS/Android all suffer bugs and
   issues which have been solved previously for rooms.
   * no local-echo of invites
   * failures to set group avatars
   * ability to specify multiple admins
 * It doesn't support pushing updates to clients (particularly for flair
   membership): https://github.com/vector-im/riot-web/issues/5235
 * It doesn't support third party invites.
 * Groups could benefit from other features which already exist today for rooms
   * e.g. Room Directories
 * Groups are centralised, rather than being replicated across all
   participating servers.

## Solution

Represent groups by rooms rather than a custom first-class entity.

We reserve aliases which begin with a `+` to represent groups - e.g. the room
for group `+test:example.com` is `#+test:example.com`.

We introduce `m.room.group` and `m.room.subgroup` events which define the rooms
and subgroups within the group. A `present: true` key is included to
distinguish from a deleted state event. Something like:

```json
{

>     "type": "m.room.group",

Reviewer 3: does anybody else feel like this name is misleading? It's a room within a group, not the other way around. Shouldn't it be `m.group.room`? Or conceivably `m.room.group.room`?

Author: the only reason for `m.room` is for consistency in namespacing it alongside `m.room.message` and other "events which happen in rooms".  however, given #1767 proposes we rename `m.room.message` as `m.message` when we sprout extensible events, then we could do the same trick here and just call this an `m.group`.  I think the `.room` suffix is unnecessary though - what would the `m.group` event be describing if not a room?

Reviewer 3: > what would the `m.group` event be describing if not a room?

well, intuitively based on the name, a group. Sure, on reflection, you might realise that it "must" be a room, but you definitely have to stop and think about it, and it will confuse everyone.

On further thought, this should probably be `m.group.child`, which would include both rooms and subgroups-as-rooms

>     "state_key": "#room1:example.com",

Reviewer 3: are we sure we want this to be an alias to the room rather than the ID? Using an alias implies that the rooms within a group can change without updating the state within the group. It also raises the question of what happens when a room is listed twice (via different aliases) with conflicting options.

Author: so my rationale was that you don't want the group to break when someone upgrades a room. however I agree that it comes with other problems. i'm indifferent; if we switch to using a room ID, we'll need to include via params too (cc @kegsay for a similar problem we were discussing earlier)

Reviewer 3: (using room id would raise the problem of "how do I join it", but maybe we could also include "via" servers in the `contents` ?)

Reviewer 3: (thanks github for hiding your reply from me...)

Reviewer 3: resolving this thread in favour of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772/files#r514648501

    "contents": {
        "present": true
    }
}

{
    "type": "m.room.group",
    "state_key": "#room2:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true,
        "autojoin": true
    }
}

{
    "type": "m.room.subgroup",
    "state_key": "+something:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true
    }
}
{
    "type": "m.room.subgroup",
    "state_key": "+otherthing:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true

>     }

Reviewer 3: I'm somewhat unclear why we need a separate type of event for this. What is the difference between adding a group as a  `m.room.subgroup` and adding a grouproom as an `m.room.group`?

Author: i think it was just in case it helped the client lay things out, knowing the difference between leaf & branch children without having to sniff prefixes or look at state events within those rooms.  agreed it looks weird, and very happy to kill with 🔥

Reviewer 3: :fire:

}
```

Name, Topic, Membership etc share the same events as a normal room.

The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar. (In future it might
preferable to use hand-crafted small resolution images: see
[matrix-doc#1778](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1778).

Long description requires a new event: `m.room.description`.  This can also be

> used for rooms as well as groups.

Reviewer 3: how does this differ from `m.room.topic` ?

Author: I'm thinking of a Slack-style community/room description - typically a paragraph or two of rich text which gives lots of details about the intended use of the community/room.  Currently they look like this sort of thing for the old /groups API:

<img width="989" alt="Screenshot 2020-10-21 at 02 49 12" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1294269/96663158-0822bf00-1348-11eb-871f-2bbc8da85b00.png">

An alternative could be to use pinned messages, if we had those (which is nice because you can then have a hierarchy of descriptions set by different levels of admins/mods as the current noticeboard for that community)

Groups may be nested, and membership of groups is defined as the union of the
members of the group room and its subgroups.  If `+top:example.com` has two
subgroups, the user membership of `+top:example.com` is the union of the
subgroups and the group itself.  This allows hierarchies of groups & users to be
defined.

Clients peek in rooms (recursing into subgroups as needed) in order to determine
group membership.

Invites, 3PID invites, Power Levels etc all work as for a normal room.

Normal messages within the room could be showed and used as a 'lobby' area for
the given group.

This requires no server changes at all, other than better support for peeking
(see Dependencies below), and could allow the existing /groups API to be
deprecated and removed outright.

> ## ACLs

Author: Somewhere near here we should spell out that to manage group membership effectively, we need to support force-joins so that group admins can force-join users to subgroups.  The initial join to the main group would need to be consensual of course, but we should support letting the user then consent to being unilaterally joined to rooms and subgroups for that group, in the interests of good UX (i.e. autojoining all the right rooms).

Reviewer 8: You could have synapse auto-join you to a group and the group do the rest :)

Reviewer 3: > < @Cadair >  You could have synapse auto-join you to a group and the group do the rest :)

I don't understand what you mean by this.

Reviewer 3: This is now available in the form of "default" children.

 3. The origin `m.flair` event includes the event_id of the user's
    `m.room.membership` event in the group.  The server performing the check can
    then query this specific event from one of the servers hosting the group-room,
    and we perhaps extend the S2S API to say whether a given state event is current
    considered current_state or not.  If the `m.room.membership` event is confirmed
    as current, then the `m.flair` is decorated as being confirmed.

Of these, option 3 feels best?

## Dependencies

This needs peeking to work effectively over the CS API
([MSC1776](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1776)).

This needs peeking to work effectively over federation (e.g. by having servers
join remote rooms as `@null:example.com` in order to participate in them for
peeking purposes - [MSC1777](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1777)).

These dependencies are shared with profiles-as-rooms
([MSC1769](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1769)).

## Security considerations

XXX: how do we stop cycles & recursion abuse of the subgroups?

## Tradeoffs

This consciously sacrifices the ability to delegate group lookups through

> to a centralised group server.  However, group data can already be stale as we

Reviewer 3: why would we want to delegate group lookups through to a centralised group server ?

Author: say you have an LDAP server with millions of users in it, or you have some opaque group server which doesn't let you enumerate group membership but only lets you query it.  You might want to try to keep a single source of truth of the group membership in that centralised group server, rather than mirroring/bridging it into a Matrix room (which in turn may get out of sync between the participating Matrix servers).

Reviewer 3: :+1: completely failed to grok that "group server" in this case referred to something outside Matrix.

rely on cached attestations from federated servers to apply ACLs even if the
remote server is not available.  So this isn’t much worse than eventually
consistent group membership as you’d find in a room.

It also means that large groups have to be bridged in their entirety into the
room, rather than querying/searching incrementally.  This is something we should

> fix for bridged rooms in general too, however.

Reviewer 3: is fixing it for bridged rooms something we are ever likely to fix?

Author: yes, i think so: reasons we might want to fix it for bridging rooms in general include:
 * joining a massive auditorium room (e.g. a twitter timeline with 10M followers) without wanting to sync or leak who's in the audience
 * speeding up group joins by lazy loading in members on demand (c.f. #2775)

Reviewer 3: > joining a massive auditorium room (e.g. a twitter timeline with 10M followers) without wanting to sync or leak who's in the audience

If the objective is to hide the membership from Matrix users, then we simply don't map the membership onto Matrix state, and instead keep that state internal to the bridging server. That applies to both bridges and Spaces-for-access-control.

> speeding up group joins by lazy loading in members on demand (c.f. #2775)

This is presumably a mitigation to huge membership lists, rather than either a reason that we need to fix it for bridges or a way to avoid having those huge membership lists in the first place.

Reviewer 3: this wording was removed in 4040254001b94e02dee7a405e59d738ba7c0a116 so this thread is resolved

This also consciously sacrifices the ability for a group server to provide
different 'views' of groups to different querying users, as being
overengineered.  Instead, all common use cases should be modellable by modelling
group membership as room membership (nesting if required).

## Issues

How does this work with

> [MSC1228](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1228) (removing MXIDs)?

Reviewer 3: no idea. Surely we're not blocking it on that?

Author: we're not (especially as #1228 is evolving over at #2787); just trying to keep it on the periphery of the radar.

Reviewer 3: ack. Will remove it from here to avoid confusion.

used for rooms as well as groups.

Groups may be nested, and membership of groups is defined as the union of the
members of the group room and its subgroups.  If `+top:example.com` has two
subgroups, the user membership of `+top:example.com` is the union of the
subgroups and the group itself.  This allows hierarchies of groups & users to be
defined.

Clients peek in rooms (recursing into subgroups as needed) in order to determine
group membership.

Invites, 3PID invites, Power Levels etc all work as for a normal room.

Normal messages within the room could be showed and used as a 'lobby' area for
the given group.

This requires no server changes at all, other than better support for peeking
(see Dependencies below), and could allow the existing /groups API to be
deprecated and removed outright.

## ACLs

Currently the group server has total control over specifying the list of users
who may be present in a group, as seen by a given querying user. In other words,
arbitrary users can see entirely different views of a group at the server's
discretion.

Whilst this is very powerful for mapping arbitrary group structures into Matrix,

> it may be overengineered.

Reviewer 3: I am completely failing to grok these paragraphs. Are they saying that the group server restricts who can join/peek into the grouproom? (True, at least until the grouproom becomes federated to a second server. Is that a problem? Is it "overengineered"?)

Or are they saying that a group server can hide the membership of some users from other users? (Also true, at least as long as the second set of users are peeking rather than formally joining. Again, I'm not clear why this is "overengineered": it's just something that falls out of the architecture.)

Or something else?

Author: These paragraphs are/were a critique of the current /groups API implementation, where the server hosting a given group can completely lie about the membership of the group to different inspecting users, and back the group membership with a random dataset which doesn't need to be synchronised with a room.

Reviewer 3: ah, that wasn't clear to me. I'll try to update the text to clarify.

   profile rooms of those users.  However, we can't trust the flair which the
   users advertise on the profile - it has to be cross-referenced from the
   memberships of the groups in question.

To do this cross-referencing, options are:

 1. The client checks the group membership (very inefficient, given the server
    could/should do it for them), or...
 2. The server checks the group membership by peeking the group and somehow
    decorates the `m.flair` event as validated before sending it to the client.
    This is also inefficient, as it forces the server to peek a potentially large
    group (unless we extend federation to allow peeking specific state events)
 3. The origin `m.flair` event includes the event_id of the user's
    `m.room.membership` event in the group.  The server performing the check can
    then query this specific event from one of the servers hosting the group-room,
    and we perhaps extend the S2S API to say whether a given state event is current
    considered current_state or not.  If the `m.room.membership` event is confirmed
    as current, then the `m.flair` is decorated as being confirmed.

> Of these, option 3 feels best?

Reviewer 3: I'm somewhat inclined to park discussions on flair until we have some of the other pieces in place.

> # Proposal for groups as rooms (take 2)

Reviewer 5: As this MSC should be blocked by #1840 unless we want clients to have to have hacky work-arounds / fixes forever, either this MSC should be changed to kind:feature or that MSC to kind:core

Author: ...or alternatively #2773. agreed it needs one or the other to be nice.

Reviewer 3: wait. Why is #1840 actually needed?

Reviewer 3: (or #2773 for that matter)

Reviewer 9: So chat clients have a way to avoid showing all the not-chat rooms, right?

Reviewer 3: Clients will need to be aware of the spacerooms and show the heirarchy appropriately in their room lists anyway. I'm unclear how a room type helps with that.

Reviewer 10: Presumably to communicate that the space room is not meant to be used for regular messaging, and a UI with that purpose should not be presented to the user?

The mention of this already seems to be a part of the proposal since an Oct 27 commit (and the MSC1840 type updated accordingly), though, so I think this thread is resolved?

   all the different clients out there.
 * Much of the API overlaps significantly with mechanisms we already have for
   managing rooms:
   * Tracking membership identity
   * Tracking membership hierarchy
   * Inviting/kicking/banning user
   * Tracking key/value metadata
 * There are membership management features which could benefit rooms which
   would also benefit groups and vice versa (e.g. "auditorium mode")
 * The current implementations on Riot Web/iOS/Android all suffer bugs and
   issues which have been solved previously for rooms.
   * no local-echo of invites
   * failures to set group avatars
   * ability to specify multiple admins
 * It doesn't support pushing updates to clients (particularly for flair
   membership): https://github.com/vector-im/riot-web/issues/5235
 * It doesn't support third party invites.
 * Groups could benefit from other features which already exist today for rooms
   * e.g. Room Directories
 * Groups are centralised, rather than being replicated across all
   participating servers.

## Solution

Represent groups by rooms rather than a custom first-class entity.

We reserve aliases which begin with a `+` to represent groups - e.g. the room

> for group `+test:example.com` is `#+test:example.com`.

Reviewer 11: Do you think we could just drop the + prefix altogether?  I'd argue that it's not super necessary.  Clients are able to determine if a room represents a group by either

a) checking if it's listed as a subgroup of another group (if in the appropriate context

or b) checking if there's a `m.room.groups`/`m.room.group` set

and users would be able to tell by the difference in the UI for the two.  Adding the plus also kinda creates two grey areas when the presence of a `m.room.groups` conflicts with the presence of a plus, which might either complicate the spec or create inconsistent behavior in clients.

If we didn't require the plus at all, clients could very simply just add a "Linked Rooms" menu to the UI, and put the lobby chat below that, without needing to care about whether or not the room is technically a group or not.  In this way, rooms and groups become even closer in terms of implementation.

I could see this being a bit of a difference when it comes to a user seeing a link to a matrix room without knowing what kind of room that room is.  A plus /would/ clarify this to them, but I'd argue that it might even be better to leave it out.

Let's say a group is advertising their matrix room with a message like, "Come chat with us on Matrix!  #+coolpeople:our.server".  In this case, the user doesn't care too much about whether or not their joining a single room or a hub room.  That's something they'd find out when they got there, but they were going to open it anyway.  

But, seeing two different kinds of links might make things ever so slightly more complex from their perspective.  They don't know what a +room:server.com is or why it's different than a #room:server.com and it makes Matrix seem big and scary and confusing, even if that's something that they'd figure out pretty quick.

Having a simple and consistent way to refer to and join rooms removes unnecessary complications from the end user, and special cases from client implementors.  Thoughts?

Reviewer 11: Oop that came out longer than I thought it would.  Also wanted to note that this affects:

KB1RD's comment directly above, as clients wouldn't peek a room unless it was listed as a subgroup, simplifying things slightly

Soru's comment on #+ vs +, since there would be only #

Reviewer 5: > or b) checking if there's a m.room.groups/m.room.group set

or if this MSC finally gets merged it'll be trivial to detect all kind of special rooms in the future https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840

Author: i could get behind just using a # syntax for them, to avoid the scary factor, and telling people to `/join #mygroup:matrix.org` if they want to participate in a given hierarchy of rooms.

Reviewer 3: I've dropped the proposal for the prefix for now. We'll see how it works out.

Reviewer 12: Right now it is visually unambiguous whether a string means a #room or a +group or a !room_id or maybe $an_event. In case of simple clients too, where the client both inputs and presents messages as plaintext. Users probably prefer to know what `/join #whatever` will do beforehand instead of figuring out later that they have joined a space instead of a single room. 

I agree that without specific (and optional!) client support it is virtually impossible to tell whether it's a room, or a space, or anything else. (While it's true that this may be moot if #1840 gets standardised.) 
Also I disagree that people don't care whether they get a group, a room or a space, or something else, and that it would confuse them that completely different objects have different looking names (but i's true that I'm a geek so sigils are kind of natural, while it *may* be different for mortals).

We introduce a `m.room.groups` state event which defines how a room should

> behave as a group - i.e. the rooms which it groups together, and any subgroups

Reviewer 4: What would happen if `"rooms"` contained a room that is a group? Would this be treated as a `"subgroup"` (so all members would be added to the group) or would it allow organizing groups within other groups without combining the member lists?

Reviewer 3: This is defined and discussed at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r508233777.

nested within it.

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.groups",
    "contents": {
        "rooms": [
            {
                "room": "#room1:example.com",
            },
            {
                "room": "#room2:example.com",

>                 "autojoin": true

Reviewer 4: What if the group and #room2:example.com are on different servers? I'm assuming that the membership of #room2 would be determined by peeking. In that case, which servers would be peeked? Or is it somehow "pushed" to downstream servers?

Reviewer 4: I'm assuming that `example.com` would be peeked if the peeking server has no knowledge of the group. This effectively centralizes groups again. While this may be OK for groups on well-established servers, it has a few drawbacks:
1. If the server owning the alias goes offline, the group becomes unpeekable and new participants will not see full membership
2. The server owning the alias effectively has full control. They can claim that the room at that alias is different and, using this, control the membership for servers that are not peeking elsewhere.
This effectively bikesheds any P2P groups, private groups, or invite-only subrooms.

Reviewer 3: I'm not really following what the question is here.

Reviewer 3: I'm confused what this thread is asking for, and no clarification has been forthcoming, so marking it resolved.

            },
            {
                "room": "#room3:example.com",
            },
        ],
        "subgroups": [
            {
                "group": "+something:example.com",
            },
            {
                "group": "+otherthing:example.com",
            },
        ]
    },
}
```

XXX: alternatively, perhaps all the rooms and subgroups should be their own
state event with a unique state key, ensuring that this can scale to large
groups and doesn't have to be edited atomically. A key like `present: true`

> would be needed to distinguish from a deleted state event. Something like:

Reviewer 6: I like the state key idea better. It feels similar to how member events are sent to the client, with m.room.member and the user ID.

> would be needed to distinguish from a deleted state event. Something like:

Reviewer 3: agreed. for now I'm going to drop the "one big event" proposal from the document.

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.group",
    "state_key": "#room1:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true
    }
}

{
    "type": "m.room.group",
    "state_key": "#room2:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true,
        "autojoin": true
    }
}

{
    "type": "m.room.subgroup",
    "state_key": "+something:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true
    }
}
{
    "type": "m.room.subgroup",
    "state_key": "+otherthing:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true
    }
}
```

Name, Topic, Membership etc share the same events as a normal room.

The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar.

Long description requires a new event: `m.room.description`.  This can also be
used for rooms as well as groups.

Groups may be nested, and membership of groups is defined as the union of the
members of the group room and its subgroups.  If `+top:example.com` has two
subgroups, the user membership of `+top:example.com` is the union of the
subgroups and the group itself.  This allows hierarchies of groups & users to be

> defined.

Reviewer 6: I think subgroups need more thought put into them. From the perspective of a client developer, they seem overengineered and very flawed. I don't know how all the features mentioned here could be implemented in a way that makes sense for people using an IM app.

As I understand it, all these patterns of group joins are possible:

- `#+some_group:server.tld`
- `#+some_group:server.tld` and `#+a_subgroup:server.tld`
- `#+a_subgroup:server.tld`

In other words, a person may be in a subgroup without being in the parent group.

If we keep similar UX to Element's groups bar where all groups are in one display list and can be re-ordered by the user, we have no way to represent the hierarchy of subgroups or allow users to take advantage of that hierarchy.

Subgroups also cannot be displayed as sections within the list (like how favourites, directs, rooms, and low priority) are currently displayed, because this only supports one level of hierarchy. In addition, if just the subgroup is joined, I don't understand how this state could be represented with this design.

Arranging groups into a tree like Discord's categories but with multiple layers still has the above problem of how to represent the inner layers if a subgroup is joined alone.

What's the _expected_ UX that people had in mind while writing this proposal?

Author: > I think subgroups need more thought put into them. 

Agreed; this is the weakest bit of the proposal.  For the first cut in Element we're not going to implement them, but the hope is to define them in the MSC to set things headed in the right direction.

> What's the expected UX that people had in mind while writing this proposal?

We haven't finalised the UX for Element yet, but the last iteration we had on this (which is several years old, sadly - we've been wanting to get to this for *ages*) is:

<img width="954" alt="Screenshot 2020-10-21 at 02 54 32" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1294269/96663572-d3633780-1348-11eb-8c2c-8b20a87f08e7.png">

In other words you'd probably let users pin whatever communities from any hierarchy at the LLP, given it's a way to switch between views of the world.  For instance, I might want to switch from the overall NV group filter to just looking at the NV Management group filter by hitting the right icon in the LLP, despite one being a subgroup of the other.

But this is To Be Determined (cc @nadonomy)

Reviewer 6: > Agreed; this is the weakest bit of the proposal. For the first cut in Element we're not going to implement them, but the hope is to define them in the MSC to set things headed in the right direction.

If you need to get groups-as-rooms out by the end of the year, and you're not going to implement subgroups in Element on the first pass, it may be beneficial to write the spec as "subgroups are a thing that exists but they don't have defined behaviour yet" and then follow that up in a future MSC for subgroups? To me, it seems likely to me that the behaviour of subgroups will need to be revised as you plan the implementation details.

I think this should be considered carefully, because hastily writing problematic subgroups into the spec and then needing to change them later would be even worse.

Reviewer 3: have made subspaces explicitly an area for future extension.

Clients peek in rooms (recursing into subgroups as needed) in order to determine

> group membership.

Reviewer 4: What about invite-only subrooms? AFAIK, this would require a change to authorization rules (to allow/reject invites based on the parent room state) and thus a new room version to implement.

Reviewer 4: Also, what about parent groups with private membership? This would require some way to authenticate via peeking or changes to federation to ensure that membership stays private.

Reviewer 3: we're emphatically not changing the auth rules.

Invites, 3PID invites, Power Levels etc all work as for a normal room.

Normal messages within the room could be showed and used as a 'lobby' area for

> the given group.

Reviewer 13: Sorry if this should have been marked as just a "comment". I'm new to collaborating on github and am still trying to fully understand the systems and etiquette.

> the given group.

Reviewer 4: It is a fair point that it is awkward to control lobbies in groups if messages can be sent to the group. However, I would argue that there is a use case for allowing *events* to groups. Right now, Zoom has a feature that can create breakout rooms. It may be useful to take an existing "normal" chat and add subrooms or subgroups to it since this could allow clients to create such breakout rooms. The same could be said for applications that use Matrix as a DB. However, I would agree that group "lobbies" should be separate, specially marked rooms -- I just think this should be because of the use case for the group and that a limitation should not be built into the protocol. This does create the problem of how to mark "normal" (non-message) groups from other custom event groups, but #1840 could help with this. Power levels could also be updated accordingly on group creation. The main problem I see would be what a client should do if it encounters messages in a group that isn't supposed to have them.

> the given group.

Reviewer 6: I agree, I think it makes the most sense for group to not be able to contain messages directly.

> the given group.

Reviewer 3: This could be fiddly to enforce at the protocol level though. Possibly we could just recommend against sending messages to group-rooms.

> the given group.

Reviewer 3: > <@Pestdoktor > That would make messagerooms and communityrooms exclusive subsets of rooms.

what would?

> the given group.

Reviewer 7: referring to
> I suggest that if a room contains rooms, then it should contain no messages.

I.e. I think community/parent rooms should still function as regular rooms

> the given group.

Reviewer 3: fine. I'm just going to recommend against sending messages to grouprooms for now.

This requires no server changes at all, other than better support for peeking
(see Dependencies below), and could allow the existing /groups API to be

> deprecated and removed outright.

Reviewer 3: made this explicit.

> ## ACLs

Author: hm. so the equivalent of a private room which invites +group:server such that only +group:server (and other explicitly invited groups and users) participate?

> ## ACLs

Reviewer 14: Syncing the group membership through the hierarchy of groups and rooms would be essential for other use cases. Actually, coming from a Joomla environment I assumed this is how it works in Matrix right now when starting to build a bridge to a Joomla/Kunena/CBuilder - System. >>> [https://github.com/ludgerh/kdbridge](url)
(Kunena Categories --> Matrix Groups, Kunena Topics --> Matrix Rooms, ...)
The bridge is now testing and I am doing the sync of memberships through the JS-API, which is quite time-consuming (1 transaction every 5 seconds...).

> ## ACLs

Reviewer 4: If this were to be added, would it be possible to add members to a room (with `synced_membership: true`) that are _not_ members of the parent group?

> ## ACLs

Reviewer 3: > If this were to be added, would it be possible to add members to a room (with synced_membership: true) that are not members of the parent group?

isn't this exactly the opposite of what is requested? or am I misunderstanding?

> ## ACLs

Reviewer 3: also, how is this related to ACLs? is it a request to modify the rules for group membership across subrooms, as defined at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772/files#diff-cdaa2b5bfe73f40db1903d17b1d242d8caa54d4af81e78e0396a369bcd9a1b90R85-R89?

> ## ACLs

Reviewer 3: I'm confused what this thread is asking for, and no clarification has been forthcoming, so marking it resolved.

Currently the group server has total control over specifying the list of users
who may be present in a group, as seen by a given querying user. In other words,
arbitrary users can see entirely different views of a group at the server's
discretion.

Whilst this is very powerful for mapping arbitrary group structures into Matrix,
it may be overengineered.

Instead, the common case is wanting to define a group where some users are
publicly visible as members, and others are not.  This is what the current use
cases require today.  A simple way of achieving would be to create a subgroup
for the private members - e.g. have `+sensitive:matrix.org` and
`+sensitive-private:matrix.org`.  The membership of
`+sensitive-private:matrix.org` is set up with `m.room.join_rules` to not to
allow peeking; you have to be joined to see the members, and users who don't
want to be seen by the public to be member of the group are added to the
subgroup.

> XXX: is there a use case today for having a group where users are unaware of the

Author: hm, so you're worried about your members leaking their MXIDs to one another from a spam/privacy perspective? i guess this is fair enough (but probably doesn't need to be here from the outset)

> XXX: is there a use case today for having a group where users are unaware of the

Reviewer 15: mostly from a privacy standpoint and less of a spam standpoint (there are easier avenues to spam people than going through a group). Definitely not for this proposal, but wanted to highlight that there is in fact a use case/desire for this functionality.

> XXX: is there a use case today for having a group where users are unaware of the

Reviewer 3: clarified that this is out of scope for now.

other users' membership?  e.g. if I am a member of `+scandalous:matrix.org`
should i have a way to stop other members knowing that I am?  One solution here
could be "auditorium mode", where users cannot see other users' identities
(unless they speak).   This could be added later, however, and would also be

> useful for normal rooms.

Reviewer 6: I think hidden membership would be better as a separate feature for any room, and not required for this MSC to go through.

   those which it is currently displaying in the timeline), it peeks the
   profile rooms of those users.  However, we can't trust the flair which the
   users advertise on the profile - it has to be cross-referenced from the
   memberships of the groups in question.
   
To do this cross-referencing, options are:

 1. The client checks the group membership (very inefficient, given the server
    could/should do it for them), or...
 2. The server checks the group membership by peeking the group and somehow
    decorates the `m.flair` event as validated before sending it to the client.
    This is also inefficient, as it forces the server to peek a potentially large
    group (unless we extend federation to allow peeking specific state events)
 3. The origin `m.flair` event includes the event_id of the user's
    `m.room.membership` event in the group.  The server performing the check can
    then query this specific event from one of the servers hosting the group-room,
    and we perhaps extend the S2S API to say whether a given state event is current
    considered current_state or not.  If the `m.room.membership` event is confirmed

>     as current, then the `m.flair` is decorated as being confirmed.

Reviewer 4: Which server would be peeked if the peeking server knows nothing about the group & user?

Author: that's a question for MSC #1769 - iirc it says that `@matthew:matrix.org`'s profile has to exist at `#@matthew:matrix.org` iirc, so you'd go peek matrix.org.

Of these, option 3 feels best?

> ## Dependencies

Reviewer 15: can we also stick this section somewhere?

```
## Unstable prefix

While this proposal is not in a published version of the specification, implementations should 
use `org.matrix.msc1772` to represent the `m` namespace. For example, `m.room.subgroup` 
becomes `org.matrix.msc1772.room.subgroup`. Alternatively, a room version of `org.matrix.msc1772`
can be used to make namespacing easier (though a room version is not necessarily required
for this MSC).
```

Reviewer 3: I think a room version is going to complicate this.

This needs peeking to work effectively on CS API.
([MSC1776](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1776))

This needs peeking to work effectively over federation (e.g. by having servers
join remote rooms as @null:example.com in order to participate in them for
peeking purposes) - ([MSC1777](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1777))

These dependencies are shared with profiles-as-rooms
([MSC1769](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1769)).

## Security considerations

> XXX: how do we stop cycles & recursion abuse of the subgroups?

Reviewer 6: This is very important to figure out. Even if cycles are out, I suspect a 1000-deep tree of subgroups would still present problems to clients and servers trying to process it.

Reviewer 3: indeed.

> XXX: how do we stop cycles & recursion abuse of the subgroups?

Reviewer 4: There are two issues with this: There's a UI issue (how to represent cyclical membership?) and there's a protocol issue (how to prevent/handle cyclical membership?).

On the prevention aspect of things... Matrix is eventually consistent, so it's impossible to ensure that two servers specifying a particular "parent" group actually know if on some other server, the child room is already a parent of the intended parent room. This means that it's impossible to ensure that a room tree has no way to form a cycle *if the room's parent can be changed after creation.* Consider this example: There are rooms A and B, as well as servers 1 and 2. Federation is interrupted between the servers. On server 1, room A is added to room (now group) B. On server 2, room B is added to room (now group) A. Now which room is a subroom of which?

Let's assume that we *don't* consider this an issue. Membership of room A would be determined by taking the union of *user* membership in room A and the membership set of group B (and the same steps for room B), so it doesn't look like there's a need for the server to get stuck in some kind of recursive loop, so long as each room is only traversed once. If a user joins one of the rooms, that's the same as joining both (assuming membership is synced). Now the problem is how to *present* this to the user of a client?

So it looks to me like their are two options: Make it impossible to change a room's parent once created or find a way to present recursive cycles to the user. So which is *less* bad?

Author: There's a third option: don't inherit membership to children, at which point parent/child relationships are just for building a tree view in your room list.  Any cycles (or obnoxiously large depths) can then be detected and eliminated clientside.

Reviewer 3: we're not inheriting membership, so basically we're doing what matthew said here.

## Tradeoffs

This consciously sacrifices the ability to delegate group lookups through
to a centralised group server.  However, group data can already be stale as we
rely on cached attestations from federated servers to apply ACLs even if the
remote server is not available.  So this isn’t much worse than eventually
consistent group membership as you’d find in a room.

It also means that large groups have to be bridged in their entirety into the
room, rather than querying/searching incrementally.  This is something we should
fix for bridged rooms in general too, however.

This also consciously sacrifices the ability for a group server to provide
different 'views' of groups to different querying users, as being
overengineered.  Instead, all common use cases should be modellable by modelling

> group memnbership as room membership (nesting if required).

Reviewer 16: ```suggestion
group membership as room membership (nesting if required).
```

    Where the parent space also claims a parent, clients can recursively peek
    into the grandparent space, and so on.

This structure means that rooms can end up appearing multiple times in the
room list hierarchy, given they can be children of multiple different spaces
(or have multiple parents in different spaces).

In a typical hierarchy, we expect *both* parent->child and child->parent
relationships to exist, so that the space can be discovered from the room, and
vice versa. Occasions when the relationship only exists in one direction
include:

 * User-curated lists of rooms: in this case the space will not be listed as a
   parent of the room.

 * "Secret" rooms: rooms where the admin does not want the room to be
   advertised as part of a given space, but *does* want the room to form part
   of the hierarchy of that space for those in the know.

Cycles in the parent->child and child->parent relationships are *not*
permitted, but clients (and servers) should be aware that they may be
encountered, and ignore the relationship rather than recursing infinitely.

XXX: we need to deterministically specify where the cycles get cut.

> I think kegan found a solution for this when implementing MSC2946 in Dendrite.

Reviewer 3: @ara4n why do you think this needs to be deterministic, and why does it need to be specified here?

Reviewer 17: Because, otherwise you would end in Matrix equivalent of SFINAE.

Reviewer 3: @erkinalp wrote:

> Because, otherwise you would end up in Matrix equivalent of SFINAE.

please can you expand on this? what do you mean?

Reviewer 17: People will rely on the specific way that cycles are broken by servers.

My proposal for resolving cycles as follows: Place room creates and room parent/child settings in a list, and attempt to liinearise them as if they were regular message events in a single room. Parenting order will then be determined by the most-before-happened parent/child pointers for every room in that linearisation.

Reviewer 3: > People will rely on the specific way that cycles are broken by servers.

There are no server-side changes proposed in this MSC, so I'm afraid I don't see how this is relevant here at all.

permitted, but clients (and servers) should be aware that they may be
encountered, and ignore the relationship rather than recursing infinitely.

XXX: we need to deterministically specify where the cycles get cut.
I think kegan found a solution for this when implementing MSC2946 in Dendrite.

XXX: we need to specify how vias are updated as time goes on (perhaps servers
with sufficient permission could automatically add themselves into the via event
via the bot from MSC2962?)

### Auto-joined children

The `auto_join` flag on a child listing allows a space admin to list the
sub-spaces and rooms in that space which should be automatically joined by
members of that space.  (This is not a force-join, which are descoped for
a future MSC; the user can subsequently part these room if they desire.)

Joining should be performed by the client.  This can optionally be sped up by
using [MSC2946](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2946) to get a
summary of the spacetree to be joined, and then using a batch join API (when
available) to join whichever subset of it makes most sense for the client's
UX.

Obviously auto-joining can be a DoS vector, and we consider it to be antisocial

> for a space to try to autojoin its members to more than 100 children (in total).

Reviewer 8: My main UX concern about this is actually related to the current default push rules behaviour. If you are auto-joined to even 5 of the most active rooms in a space, you are going to get bombarded with pushes until you manually go through and change them all to mentions only.

Reviewer 3: we've deliberately descoped auto-join rooms for the initial MSC.

   those which it is currently displaying in the timeline), it peeks the
   profile rooms of those users. (Ideally there would be an API to support
   peeking multiple rooms at once to facilitate this.)

 * The client must check that the user is *actually* a member of the advertised
   spaces. Nominally it can do this by peeking the membership list of the
   space; however for efficiency we could expose a dedicated Client-Server API
   to do this check (and both servers and clients can cache the results fairly
   aggressively.)

## Dependencies

 * [MSC1840](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840) for room
   types.

 * [MSC2753](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2753) for
   effective peeking over the C/S API.

 * [MSC2444](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2444) (or similar)
   for effective peeking over Federation.

These dependencies are shared with profiles-as-rooms
([MSC1769](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1769)).

## Security considerations

* The peek server has significant power. For example, a poorly chosen peek
  server could lie about the space membership and add an

>   `@evil_user:example.org`.

Reviewer 8: Is this still valid in the newly shrunk scope of this MSC or does it belong in #2962?

Reviewer 3: I don't think so. Moved to #2962.

> # Proposal for Matrix "spaces" (formerly known as "groups as rooms (take 2)")

Reviewer 3: @gfodor [writes](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#issuecomment-806193425)

> one thing that I didn't see in this proposal is how to create space-level notification settings

(please use a comment on the document in future so that we can maintain a conversation thread rather than it being lost among all the other comments on the PR.)

That's true, although notifications (and push rules as a whole) are well overdue a makeover. I'm loath to complicate this proposal by trying to figure out how we would wedge support into push rules. [MSC2785](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2785) is a proposal for how the notifications system could be revamped, and I think it would be better to consider integrating notifications and spaces when that work gets done.

Reviewer 18: ah thank you for the reference! for now, I've updated my system to inject a `spaceroom_id` into the message event content payload for now to be able to condition on it.

Reviewer 10: I agree that notifications should be considered separately; I don't see any obvious way in which the current design would get in the way of the notifications design later, so IMO it is not a blocker for this MSC.

purposes. Examples include:

 * Allowing users to discover different rooms related to a particular topic:
   for example "official matrix.org rooms".
 * Allowing administrators to manage permissions across a number of rooms: for
   example "a new employee has joined my company and needs access to all of our
   rooms".
 * Letting users classify their rooms: for example, separating "work" from
   "personal" rooms.

We refer to such collections of rooms as "spaces".

Synapse and Element-Web currently implement an unspecced "groups" API (referred
to as "`/r0/groups`" in this document) which attempts to provide this
functionality (see
[matrix-doc#971](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/971)). However,
this is a complex API which has various problems (see
[appendix](#appendix-problems-with-the-r0groups-api)).

This proposal suggests a new approach where spaces are themselves represented
by rooms, rather than a custom first-class entity.  This requires few server
changes, other than better support for peeking (see Dependencies below).

The existing `/r0/groups` API would be deprecated in Synapse and remain
unspecified.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
## Proposal

First and foremost, all references to the communities/groups feature are removed from the spec.
```

There's a few misc mentions of groups in the current spec prose - just want a sentence somewhere in this MSC which makes the implicit removal explicit.

Reviewer 15: I thought the intention was that this replaces the groups system though? I don't think this would be a controversial hurdle...

Reviewer 3: well, I think as a first step, if we're talking about removing things from the spec, we need to be clear about what we're removing.

This MSC has already exceeded 400 comments, so my real goal is to keep a laser focus on what I *have* to have here, and punt everything out to a separate MSC. I was mostly hoping to avoid having any more bikesheds on this MSC than absolutely necessary... and yet here we are having a metabikeshed :/

Reviewer 15: I'll split it out to its own MSC, but I would like to use the soapbox to say this feels like the wrong process.

Reviewer 3: thanks.

Each space is represented by its own room, known as a "space-room". The rooms
within the space are determined by state events within the space-room.

Spaces are referred to primarily by their alias, for example
`#foo:matrix.org`.

> Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the `m.room.type`

Reviewer 4: It seems clear that a room needs a type of `m.space` to be recognized by *clients* as a space. But does it need a type to be recognized by servers as a space?

I would advocate for the type being a client-side only thing, since one may want to use spaces for things that should not be presented UI wise as a space. Ex, nested directories, or hidden rooms for protocol data (like Matrix Notepad events) inside a chat room.

Reviewer 19: Yes it does for https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2946 to function

Reviewer 5: Not if every room is seen as a space and "normal" rooms just happen to have zero children

Reviewer 20: Precisely - that is part of [my proposal](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772/files/51aa5e2c40af2c69a58c4a2384dd9c3c75166d8f).  Simplify and generalise by abstracting from this specific usecase.

Reviewer 21: > But does it need a type to be recognized by servers as a space?

No.

> Yes it does for #2946 to function

It doesn't rely on the room type. The room type is inserted in the response but the server will walk all children/parents regardless of what type of room it is. So it doesn't need it in order to function.

> Not if every room is seen as a space and "normal" rooms just happen to have zero children, the server could live without having to type spaces as such at all, making the type a purely cosmetic thing for clients

This is how #2946 treats spaces - it's a space if it has > 0 children.

Reviewer 3: I've tried to make it clear that this is just a display hint in 1cfe6bc0a.

> `type: m.space` property in the `m.room.create` event. This allows clients to

Reviewer 22: perhaps clarify that this type field is in the event content, as it's obviously not the event type here.

Reviewer 3: @bwindels: you mean something like:

```suggestion
`type: m.space` property in the content of the `m.room.create` event. This allows clients to
```

?

to see the directory of rooms within the space by peeking into the space-room
(thus avoiding the need to add `m.room.member` events to the event graph within
the room).

Join rules, invites and 3PID invites work as for a normal room, with the
exception that `invite_state` sent along with invites should be amended to
include the event containing the type `m.space`, to allow clients to discern
whether an invite is to a space-room or not.

XXX: Should we also include a MSC2946 summary of the space in the invite too?

### Relationship between rooms and spaces

The intention is that rooms and spaces form a hierarchy, which clients can use
to structure the user's room list into a tree view. The parent/child
relationship can be expressed in one of two ways:

 1. The admins of a space can advertise rooms and subspaces for their space by
    setting `m.space.child` state events. The `state_key` is the ID of a child
    room or space, and the content should contain a `via` key which gives a list
    of candidate servers that can be used to join the room. Something like:

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",

>         "state_key": "!abcd:example.com",

Reviewer 23: It seems that both `!foo:bar` and `#foo:bar` are used in this document to describe spaces. I'm a bit confused at whether this was changed at some point or if they mean something different...or something else? If spaces are rooms, I'd expect `#foo:bar`.

Reviewer 19: both `!` and `#` point to Rooms. `!` is the ID of a Room, it cannot change. `#` is a pointer to a room, it is mutable.
Using a mutable identifier here would allow for the rooms to change on the fly without the client knowing without polling the room directory periodically.

Reviewer 23: Ah, duh! I think it isn't really clear in these examples that things like `abcd` is an ID vs. other bits being aliases, but not sure there's anything to "fix" there.

        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com", "test.org"]
        }
    }

    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!efgh:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com"],
            "order": "abcd",
            "auto_join": true
        }
    }

    // no longer a child room
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!jklm:example.com",
        "content": {}
    }
    ```

    Children where `via` is not present are ignored.

    The `order` key is a string which is used to provide a default ordering of
    siblings in the room list. (Rooms are sorted based on a lexicographic
    ordering of `order` values; rooms with no `order` come last. `order`s which
    are not strings, or do not consist solely of ascii characters in the range

>     `\x20` (space) to `\x7F` (`~`), or consist of more than 50 characters, are

Reviewer 24: I get why ASCII characters, as those can be used as a substitute for arbitrary-precision integer (well, from 0 to 7.6945e+98 in that case). But then, why ask for lexicographic order instead of plain ASCII-based numerical ordering? Lexicographic ordering opens a few cans of worms. Here, I guess that by "lexical" you mean "alphabetical", and do not specify "ASCII order"? If you do mean "ASCII-ordered", it should be stated plainly.

An alternative is asking for a 64-bit-or-so integer. That ought to be enough for anybody.

I also agree with the other comment that non-conforming events should be rejected.

Reviewer 3: see [thread above](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r596223581) about what "lexicographic ordering" means, and whether there is a better way to phrase this.

> An alternative is asking for a 64-bit-or-so integer. That ought to be enough for anybody.

our experience with [m.tag](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/client-server-api/#mtag) was that you ran out of precision very quickly, and had to renumber everything (see https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/issues/3280). `m.tag` uses a float rather than an int, but the same argument would apply.

Reviewer 24: Thanks for the clarification. As for "phrasing" lexicographic ordering, I guess we'll copy what we agree on for the previous review. "true" lexicographic ordering is less complex for such a reduced set of characters, but you have to decide whether `space` is sorted after or before `0`, which is probably locale-dependant (`LC_COLLATE`). It's just that "lexicographic" doesn't mean the same to you and me. To me, it just sounds really complex to agree on the same ordering in multiple implementations :)

>     `\x20` (space) to `\x7F` (`~`), or consist of more than 50 characters, are
>     forbidden and should be ignored if received.)

Reviewer 17: Make it client-side undefined rather than forbidden.
```suggestion
    `\x20` (space) to `\x7F` (`~`), or consist of more than 50 characters have
    undefined client behaviour.)
```

Reviewer 3: why?

Reviewer 17: Some languages just require longer words in everyday speech, polysynthetic languages are even more so, and it is known that French, one of the most commonly spoken languages on Earth, is going polysynthetic.

Reviewer 3: @erkinalp wrote:

> Some languages just require longer words in everyday speech

this is the `order` field. It is not intended to carry human-meaningful words. It's just an opaque sequence of characters.

Reviewer 17: The proposal is clear that it is a sorting key. Why should I not use a human-readable sorting key?

Reviewer 3: > Why should I not use a human-readable sorting key?

Because that's not its intended usage. I can't stop you abusing it by trying to stick words in, but I don't see why I should expand the character set to allow you to do so.

In any case, as @joepie91 points out in [another thread](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r551045838), undefined behaviour is a recipe for people start doing non-standard behaviour in their clients, which introduces incompatibilities. The tech community has learnt many times over that unspecified behaviour leads to disasters later. I'm strongly opposed to leaving this undefined.

Reviewer 17: > undefined behaviour is a recipe for people start doing non-standard behaviour in their clients, which introduces incompatibilities

Despite it is worded as undefined, there are very few sensible things you can do in this particular case: reject the long sorting key altogether, ignore the long sorting key, drop the long sorting key from listing and truncate the sorting key from either end.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the suggestion, but I'm afraid you haven't convinced me that I should change this. I'm going to close this thread unless you have anything further to add.

Reviewer 20: Theoretically one could use the hash of the key too - that would free the length at the expense of another layer of complexity.  If there are potential future use cases of long strings, it might just be worth it.

Reviewer 17: One more use case: using it as a visual child room name that is different from room name.

Reviewer 3: > Theoretically one could use the hash of the key too 

how? suppose a client wanted to insert a room between A and B. If A has `order: a`, and B has `order: b`, then the client would have to invent a value `c'` which lies between `hash(a)`  and `hash(b)`, and then *reverse the hash*. I think you've completely misunderstood how this field is intended to be used.

Reviewer 3: > One more use case: using the sorting key it as a visual child room name that is different from room name.

If we wanted to do that, we would use a different property. The `order` property is intended to allow *manual* ordering of children.

Reviewer 20: > I think you've completely misunderstood how this field is intended to be used.

You are completely right - I wrote that in a muddled mood.

    If `auto_join` is set to `true`, that indicates that the child should be
    automatically joined by members of the space: see
    [below](#auto-joined-children).

 2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via the `m.space.parent` state
    event.

    Similar to `m.space.child`, the `state_key` is the ID of the parent space,
    and the content should contain a `via` key which gives a list of candidate
    servers that can be used to join the parent.

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.space.parent",
        "state_key": "!space:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com"],

>             "present": true,

Reviewer 19: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: done 8a61ce9032dedc3bec881e97a14fcf98376c390c

            "canonical": true,
        }
    }
    ```

    Parents where `via` is not present are ignored.

    `canonical` determines whether this is the main parent for the space. When
    a user joins a room with a canonical parent, clients may switch to view
    the room in the context of that space, peeking into it in order to find
    other rooms and group them together.  In practice, well behaved rooms
    should only have one `canonical` parent, but given this is not enforced:
    if multiple are present the client should select the one with the lowest

>     room ID, as determined via a lexicographic utf-8 ordering.

Reviewer 24: I am concerned this might be rather hard on some server implementations. Room IDs are opaque identifiers, couldn't they be ordered naïvely, by numerically ordering the strings? This would be deterministic as well, while being a lot simpler and cheaper in most languages.

Reviewer 3: @MayeulC wrote:

> Room IDs are opaque identifiers, couldn't they be ordered naïvely, by numerically ordering the strings?

errrm, room IDs aren't numeric, and attempting to cast them to numbers so that you can sort them doesn't sound like a good algorithm.

I think there might be a misunderstanding here. Lexicographic ordering should be trivial for anything to implement: to be clear, it's just an extension of alphabetic sorting to utf-8. Can you explain why you feel that will be hard, and what exactly you are proposing instead?

Reviewer 3: ohhh I now see your comment below: it looks like you understand "lexicographic ordering" to mean "alphabetic sort, ignoring case". Which is not at all what we mean; but it seems this could do with clarifying.

"ASCII-ordered" is not strictly correct here, because room ID can include non-ASCII characters. (They shouldn't, but they currently can, and that's a separate topic).

How about:

```suggestion
    room ID, as determined via lexicographic ordering of the utf-8 code points in the room ID.
```

To us, "Lexicographic ordering" is the clearest way of describing the intended algorithm. [It's also worth noting that a byte-by-byte sort of (valid) UTF-8-encoded strings gives the same ordering as decoding those strings to (say) UTF-32 and then sorting code-point-by-code-point.]

Reviewer 24: That sounds pretty good to me, thank you :)

**How about `s/lexicographic/numeric/`** in your suggested change?

Is valid utf-8 enforced? If not, I would suggest simply numerically ordering byte-by-byte (which is what I meant above with "numerically ordering the strings", sorry about the confusion).

Again, sorry to nitpick here, but I feel the spec should be unambiguous and not require arbitrarily difficult things without real need for them.

----
I just find the word "lexicographic" to be ambiguous, even though it sounds obvious to us ([classical XKCD 1425](https://xkcd.com/1425/)).
As one possible example of what could go wrong with "lexicographic ordering", what if I have `é` in the room name? Should it be normalized first (as it can be stored as either `U+00E9` or with a combining accent mark `U+0065 U+0301`). Should two strings (normalized an not) be treated the same? Harmonization rules sometimes vary from library to library, and become outdated with newer unicode standards.

Reviewer 3: > How about s/lexicographic/numeric/ in your suggested change?

I think this would be more confusing, as it implies that you're going to try to convert the whole thing to a single number and then compare.

Reviewer 3: I've tweaked the wording, but I don't think it's worth getting hung up on this any further from the point of the MSC. Everyone else I've spoken to is pretty clear about what lexicographic ordering means, which means this is good enough for us to reach agreement for an MSC. We might choose to add more clarification when it lands in the main spec, which needs to be accessible to a wider audience.

    Where the parent space also claims a parent, clients can recursively peek
    into the grandparent space, and so on.

This structure means that rooms can end up appearing multiple times in the
room list hierarchy, given they can be children of multiple different spaces
(or have multiple parents in different spaces).

In a typical hierarchy, we expect *both* parent->child and child->parent
relationships to exist, so that the space can be discovered from the room, and
vice versa. Occasions when the relationship only exists in one direction
include:

 * User-curated lists of rooms: in this case the space will not be listed as a
   parent of the room.

 * "Secret" rooms: rooms where the admin does not want the room to be
   advertised as part of a given space, but *does* want the room to form part
   of the hierarchy of that space for those in the know.

Cycles in the parent->child and child->parent relationships are *not*
permitted, but clients (and servers) should be aware that they may be
encountered, and ignore the relationship rather than recursing infinitely.

XXX: we need to deterministically specify where the cycles get cut.

> I think kegan found a solution for this when implementing MSC2946 in Dendrite.

Reviewer 3: the original thread got hijacked, so once again:

@ara4n why do you think this needs to be deterministic, and why does it need to be specified here?

Reviewer 19: If it isn't deterministic & specced then different clients will cut differently and thus show different "top level" spaces

E.g in an `A -> B -> A` space hierarchy, client A might show `A -> B`, the other `B -> A` and this would on the surface look very broken

Reviewer 3: > E.g in an A -> B -> A space hierarchy, client A might show A -> B, the other B -> A and this would on the surface look very broken

right, yes. I don't think that the solution in MSC2946 (which is simply to stop walking once you find a repeat) is going to help here, because it all depends where you start from.

Reviewer 3: The alternative seems to be to specify a way that clients can agree which is the rootmost space in a loop. For example, you might say "the lexicographical lowest room id in the loop is the root". But then you still encounter effects which look very broken when a space that was the root suddenly becomes several levels down the hierarchy because someone introduced a cycle.

Reviewer 19: > the lexicographical lowest room id in the loop is the root

Yup, that is what was proposed internally at one point (and is what I implemented in EleWeb iirc)

Reviewer 23: Does this make sense to include in here then or does it make sense to leave this up to implementations?

Reviewer 3: I think it probably does make sense to make a recommendation here, yes.

Reviewer 15: We talked about this in depth and came up with the following:

* Clients are cautioned about loops and should avoid infinitely recursing the tree.
* If a client does hit a loop and isn't sure which of the nodes should be the root, it picks the node with the oldest `m.room.create` event (and tiebreaking on random because that's not entirely realistic as a scenario)

Reviewer 17: > and tiebreaking on random

Why not tiebreak on the smallest room ID?

Reviewer 17: > if a client does hit a loop and isn't sure which of the nodes should be the root, it picks the node with the oldest m.room.create event (and tiebreaking on random because that's not entirely realistic as a scenario)

Then tiebreak on the smallest room ID.

empty `state_key`) whose content is the same format as `m.room.message` (ie,
contains a `msgtype` and possibly `formatted_body`).

TODO: this could also be done via pinned messages. Failing that
`m.room.description` should probably be a separate MSC.

## Future extensions

The following sections are not blocking parts of this proposal, but are
included as a useful reference for how we imagine it will be extended in future.

### Restricting access to the spaces membership list

In the existing `/r0/groups` API, the group server has total control over the
visibility of group membership, as seen by a given querying user. In other
words, arbitrary users can see entirely different views of a group at the
server's discretion.

Whilst this is very powerful for mapping arbitrary organisational structures
into Matrix, it may be overengineered. Instead, the common case is (we believe)
a space where some users are publicly visible as members, and others are not.

One way to of achieving this would be to create a separate space for the
private members - e.g. have `#foo:matrix.org` and `#foo-private:matrix.org`.
`#foo-private:matrix.org` is set up with `m.room.history_visibility` to not to

> allow peeking; you have to be joined to see the members.

Reviewer 24: Couldn't this be harmonized with rooms ?

Profiles-as-rooms could have a parent, the same way rooms do. Likewise, rooms could be in #foo-private.

Reviewer 3: I'm afraid I don't understand this proposal.

Reviewer 3: @MayeulC I'm going to resolve this thread. If you'd like to clarify your suggestion, we can reopen it.

### Flair

("Flair" is a term we use to describe a small badge which appears next to a
user's displayname to advertise their membership of a space.)

The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar. (In future it might
preferable to use hand-crafted small resolution images: see
[matrix-doc#1778](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1778).

One way this might be implemented is:

 * User publishes the spaces they wish to announce on their profile
   ([MSC1769](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1769)
   as an `m.flair` state event: it lists the spaces which they are advertising.

 * When a client wants to know the current flair for a set of users (i.e.
   those which it is currently displaying in the timeline), it peeks the

>    profile rooms of those users. (Ideally there would be an API to support

Reviewer 24: It could be another use-case for `m.space.parent`. Couldn't rooms have flairs too?

Reviewer 3: @MayeulC wrote:

> It could be another use-case for `m.space.parent`. Couldn't rooms have flairs too?

Again I'm not really following the suggestion here. Are you proposing that we should have separate images for flair and avatar?

Reviewer 3: @MayeulC again, closing pending further clarification.

"Public" or "community" spaces would be set to `world_readable` to allow clients
to see the directory of rooms within the space by peeking into the space-room
(thus avoiding the need to add `m.room.member` events to the event graph within
the room).

Join rules, invites and 3PID invites work as for a normal room, with the
exception that `invite_state` sent along with invites should be amended to
include the `m.room.create` event, to allow clients to discern whether an
invite is to a space-room or not.

XXX: Should we also include a MSC2946 summary of the space in the invite too?

### Relationship between rooms and spaces

The intention is that rooms and spaces form a hierarchy, which clients can use
to structure the user's room list into a tree view. The parent/child
relationship can be expressed in one of two ways:

 1. The admins of a space can advertise rooms and subspaces for their space by
    setting `m.space.child` state events. The `state_key` is the ID of a child
    room or space, and the content should contain a `via` key which gives a list
    of candidate servers that can be used to join the room. Something like:

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",

>         "state_key": "!abcd:example.com",

Reviewer 8: It's worth noting here that once a room id is added to a space in the state key it can't ever be removed again. While this is a very minimal metadata leak (only really showing the existence of a room with that id) is it worth considering some method of obfuscating the ids in the state key? So that the actual room id could be redacted with the content?

Reviewer 3: yeah, one solution here would be to make the `state_key` a hash of the room id, and embed the unhashed room id in the body of the event - so that the event could be redacted leaving only the hashed id behind.

For me, that feels a bit overengineered given the scope of the information leak (room IDs aren't really that sensitive). It's maybe something we could come back to in future.

Reviewer 25: Maybe a future MSC could define a "paranoid" setting which'd enable this, either by default or optionally, to indeed make statekeys hashed?

Author: totally agreed that this would make an excellent future MSC.

 1. The admins of a space can advertise rooms and subspaces for their space by
    setting `m.space.child` state events. The `state_key` is the ID of a child
    room or space, and the content must contain a `via` key which gives a list
    of candidate servers that can be used to join the room. Something like:

    ```jsonc
    // a child room
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!abcd:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com", "test.org"]
        }
    }

    // a child room with an ordering.
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!efgh:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com"],
            "order": "abcd"
        }
    }

    // no longer a child room
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!jklm:example.com",
        "content": {}
    }
    ```

    Children where `via` is not present are ignored.

    The `order` key is a string which is used to provide a default ordering of
    siblings in the room list. (Rooms are sorted based on a lexicographic
    ordering of the Unicode codepoints of the characters in `order` values;

>     rooms with no `order` come last. `order`s which are not strings, or do not

Reviewer 19: How do we order those which come last?
Surely clients must agree so that order is deterministic & consistent between clients

Author: let's do it based on age, and failing that tiebreak on room_id.

This MSC, and related proposals, supercede
[MSC1215](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1215).

## Background and objectives

Collecting rooms together into groups is useful for a number of
purposes. Examples include:

 * Allowing users to discover different rooms related to a particular topic:
   for example "official matrix.org rooms".
 * Allowing administrators to manage permissions across a number of rooms: for
   example "a new employee has joined my company and needs access to all of our
   rooms".
 * Letting users classify their rooms: for example, separating "work" from
   "personal" rooms.

We refer to such collections of rooms as "spaces".

Synapse and Element-Web currently implement an unspecced "groups" API (referred
to as "`/r0/groups`" in this document) which attempts to provide this
functionality (see
[MSC971](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/971)). However,
this is a complex API which has various problems (see
[appendix](#appendix-problems-with-the-r0groups-api)).

This proposal suggests a new approach where spaces are themselves represented
by rooms, rather than a custom first-class entity.  This requires few server

> changes, other than better support for peeking (see Dependencies below).

Reviewer 15: E_NEEDS_UPDATE (section missing, not a dependency anymore, etc)

The existing `/r0/groups` API would be deprecated in Synapse and remain
unspecified.

## Proposal

Each space is represented by its own room, known as a "space-room". The rooms
within the space are determined by state events within the space-room.

Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the presence of a

> `type: m.space` property in the content of the `m.room.create` event. This allows clients to

Reviewer 26: (non-blocking comment) I know already mentioned in the "Rejected Alternatives" section, but I think it would be helpful to have a short rationale for why there's a new `type` property (possibly with a pointer to the "Rejected Alternatives" section for more details).  Maybe something like 

> A `type` property on the `m.room.create` event is used to ensure that a room cannot change between being a space-room and a non-space room.  For more information, see the "Rejected Alternatives" section below.

> `type: m.space` property in the content of the `m.room.create` event. This allows clients to

Reviewer 15: spec PR note: Standardized identifier grammar

offer slightly customised user experience depending on the purpose of the
room. Currently, no server-side behaviour is expected to depend on this property.

As with regular rooms, public spaces are expected to have an alias, for example
`#foo:matrix.org`, which can be used to refer to the space.

Space-rooms may have `m.room.name` and `m.room.topic` state events in the same

> way as a normal room.

Reviewer 15: presumably avatars too

Normal messages within a space-room are discouraged (but not blocked by the
server): user interfaces are not expected to have a way to enter or display
such messages.  Space-rooms should be created with a power level for
`events_default` of 100, to prevent the rooms accidentally/maliciously
clogging up with messages from random members of the space.

### Membership of spaces

Users can be members of spaces (represented by `m.room.member` state events as
normal). The existing [`m.room.history_visibility`
mechanism](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#room-history-visibility)
controls whether membership of the space is required to view the room list,
membership list, etc.

> "Public" or "community" spaces would be set to `world_readable` to allow clients

Reviewer 26: (style nit) This seems to me like a continuation of the previous sentence since it's about `m.room.history_visibility`, so feels like it should be part of the same paragraph.

to see the directory of rooms within the space by peeking into the space-room
(thus avoiding the need to add `m.room.member` events to the event graph within
the room).

Join rules, invites and 3PID invites work as for a normal room, with the
exception that `invite_state` sent along with invites should be amended to
include the `m.room.create` event, to allow clients to discern whether an

> invite is to a space-room or not.

Reviewer 15: should we turn this into a general recommendation for all invites, particularly with the likely proliferation of types in future MSCs?

Reviewer 15: we do exactly this later on in the MSC - this section could do with an update

Reviewer 23: I have a draft MSC (https://hackmd.io/P8qVmVJORvSvvKRbjiU_nw) which might do what you're asking...

### Relationship between rooms and spaces

The intention is that rooms and spaces form a hierarchy, which clients can use
to structure the user's room list into a tree view. The parent/child
relationship can be expressed in one of two ways:

 1. The admins of a space can advertise rooms and subspaces for their space by
    setting `m.space.child` state events. The `state_key` is the ID of a child
    room or space, and the content must contain a `via` key which gives a list
    of candidate servers that can be used to join the room. Something like:

    ```jsonc
    // a child room
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!abcd:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com", "test.org"]
        }
    }

    // a child room with an ordering.
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!efgh:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com"],
            "order": "abcd"
        }
    }

    // no longer a child room
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!jklm:example.com",
        "content": {}
    }
    ```

>     Children where `via` is not present are ignored.

Reviewer 15: what if via is invalid? (not an array)

Reviewer 23: MSC #2946 seems to have some more words on this:

> `m.space.child` with an invalid via (invalid is defined as missing, not an array or an empty array) are ignored.

Maybe that should be moved here though.

    The `order` key is a string which is used to provide a default ordering of
    siblings in the room list. (Rooms are sorted based on a lexicographic
    ordering of the Unicode codepoints of the characters in `order` values.
    Rooms with no `order` come last, in ascending numeric order of the
    `origin_server_ts` of their `m.room.create` events, or ascending
    lexicographic order of their `room_id`s in case of equal
    `origin_server_ts`.  `order`s which are not strings, or do not consist
    solely of ascii characters in the range `\x20` (space) to `\x7F` (`~`), or
    consist of more than 50 characters, are forbidden and should be ignored if

>     received.)

Reviewer 15: the child is ignored, or the `order`?

Reviewer 26: FWIW, I read it as `order` being ignored

Author: the `order`.

 2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via the `m.space.parent` state
    event.

    Similar to `m.space.child`, the `state_key` is the ID of the parent space,
    and the content must contain a `via` key which gives a list of candidate
    servers that can be used to join the parent.

    ```jsonc
    {
        "type": "m.space.parent",
        "state_key": "!space:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com"],
            "canonical": true
        }
    }
    ```

>     Parents where `via` is not present are ignored.

Reviewer 15: same question: what if not an array

Clients could display the auto-joined children in the room list whenever the
space appears in the list - thus helping users discover other rooms in a space
even if they're not joined to that space.  For instance, if you join
`#matrix:matrix.org`, your client could show that room in the context of its
parent space, with that space's auto-joined children shown alongside it as
siblings.

### Restricting access to the spaces membership list

In the existing `/r0/groups` API, the group server has total control over the
visibility of group membership, as seen by a given querying user. In other
words, arbitrary users can see entirely different views of a group at the
server's discretion.

Whilst this is very powerful for mapping arbitrary organisational structures
into Matrix, it may be overengineered. Instead, the common case is (we believe)
a space where some users are publicly visible as members, and others are not.

One way to of achieving this would be to create a separate space for the
private members - e.g. have `#foo:matrix.org` and `#foo-private:matrix.org`.
`#foo-private:matrix.org` is set up with `m.room.history_visibility` to not to

> allow peeking; you have to be joined to see the members.

Reviewer 26: This seems related to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1653

   rooms".
 * Letting users classify their rooms: for example, separating "work" from
   "personal" rooms.

We refer to such collections of rooms as "spaces".

Synapse and Element-Web currently implement an unspecced "groups" API (referred
to as "`/r0/groups`" in this document) which attempts to provide this
functionality (see
[MSC971](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/971)). However,
this is a complex API which has various problems (see
[appendix](#appendix-problems-with-the-r0groups-api)).

This proposal suggests a new approach where spaces are themselves represented
by rooms, rather than a custom first-class entity.  This requires minimal
server changes.

The existing `/r0/groups` API would be deprecated in Synapse and remain
unspecified.

## Proposal

Each space is represented by its own room, known as a "space-room". The rooms
within the space are determined by state events within the space-room.

Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the presence of
a `'type': 'm.space'` property in the content of the `m.room.create` event.
The value of the `type` property uses the Standardised Identifier Grammar from

> MSC #2758. This allows clients to offer slightly customised user experience

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
[MSC2758](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2758). This allows clients to offer slightly customised user experience
```

events in the same way as a normal room.

Normal messages within a space-room are discouraged (but not blocked by the
server): user interfaces are not expected to have a way to enter or display
such messages.  Space-rooms should be created with a power level for
`events_default` of 100, to prevent the rooms accidentally/maliciously
clogging up with messages from random members of the space.

### Membership of spaces

Users can be members of spaces (represented by `m.room.member` state events as
normal). The existing [`m.room.history_visibility`
mechanism](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#room-history-visibility)
controls whether membership of the space is required to view the room list,
membership list, etc. "Public" or "community" spaces would be set to
`world_readable` to allow clients to see the directory of rooms within the
space by peeking into the space-room (thus avoiding the need to add
`m.room.member` events to the event graph within the room).

Join rules, invites and 3PID invites work as for a normal room.  In order for
clients to distinguish space invites from room invites, all invites must now

> include the `m.room.create` event in their `invite_state`.

Reviewer 26: Should we also add `m.room.create` to `knock_state`?

Reviewer 23: This is similar to the conversation above: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r623375762

I have a separate draft-MSC that attempts to standardize some of the stripped state that can be seen by users: https://hackmd.io/P8qVmVJORvSvvKRbjiU_nw

Reviewer 26: OK. If there's movement towards fixing it up later, then I'm fine with punting it for now.

Author: until @clokep's MSC lands, shall we just add it to `knock_state` too in here?

Reviewer 23: That seems reasonable to me. 👍

Reviewer 23: Not done yet, but I did put this up as #3173.

    servers that can be used to join the parent.

    ```jsonc
    {
        "type": "m.space.parent",
        "state_key": "!space:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com"],
            "canonical": true
        }
    }
    ```

    Parents where `via` is not present or invalid (not an array) are ignored.

    `canonical` determines whether this is the main parent for the space. When
    a user joins a room with a canonical parent, clients may switch to view the
    room in the context of that space, peeking into it in order to find other
    rooms and group them together.  In practice, well behaved rooms should only
    have one `canonical` parent, but given this is not enforced: if multiple
    are present the client should select the one with the lowest room ID, as
    determined via a lexicographic ordering of the Unicode code-points.

    To avoid abuse where a room admin falsely claims that a room is part of a
    space that it should not be, clients could ignore such `m.space.parent`
    events unless either (a) there is a corresponding `m.space.child` event in
    the claimed parent, or (b) the sender of the `m.space.child` event has a

>     sufficient power-level to send such an `m.space.child` event in the

Reviewer 27: This does mean that if an admin leaves the parent space the child relationship will break, which is a bit weird. I don't know how you'd handle it any differently though.

Reviewer 3: s/leaves/is demoted/. And yes, this is called out in the issues.

Author: yup, agreed it's weird. but nobody has found a better solution. speak now or forever...

relationships to exist, so that the space can be discovered from the room, and
vice versa. Occasions when the relationship only exists in one direction
include:

 * User-curated lists of rooms: in this case the space will not be listed as a
   parent of the room.

 * "Secret" rooms: rooms where the admin does not want the room to be
   advertised as part of a given space, but *does* want the room to form part
   of the hierarchy of that space for those in the know.

Cycles in the parent->child and child->parent relationships are *not*
permitted, but clients (and servers) should be aware that they may be
encountered, and MUST spot and break cycles rather than infinitely looping.

In order for UI to be consistent across different clients, any cycles must be
cut deterministically.  For instance, if space A points to space B as a child
but space B also points to space A as a child, then clients must be consistent
on whether A is shown in the UI as the parent of B (or vice versa).  Therefore
when a client spots a loop in parent->child or child->parent relationships, it
MUST ignore the cycle by cutting it such that the oldest space-room is the

> root (i.e. oldest parent).  'Oldest' means the room whose `m.room.create`

Author: fixed

event has the numerically smallest `origin_server_ts`.  If the oldest rooms
are precisely the same age, we select the root as the room with the smallest
`room_id` (lexicographically comparing the Unicode code-points of the

> `room_id` string).

Reviewer 28: Proposal to resolve cycles. https://hackmd.io/eQpyqCcRR-Gj-SWZcD-Fx:

Author: added

   advertised as part of a given space, but *does* want the room to form part
   of the hierarchy of that space for those in the know.

Cycles in the parent->child and child->parent relationships are *not*
permitted, but clients (and servers) should be aware that they may be
encountered, and MUST spot and break cycles rather than infinitely looping.

In order for UI to be consistent across different clients, any cycles must be
cut deterministically.  For instance, if space A points to space B as a child
but space B also points to space A as a child, then clients must be consistent
on whether A is shown in the UI as the parent of B (or vice versa).  Therefore
when a client needs to consistently visualise a space hierarchy, it should
check for loops in parent->child or child->parent relationships and ignore the
cycle by cutting it such that the oldest space-room is the root (i.e. oldest
parent). 'Oldest' means the room whose `m.room.create` event has the
numerically smallest `origin_server_ts`.  If the oldest rooms are precisely
the same age, we select the root as the room with the smallest `room_id`
(lexicographically comparing the Unicode code-points of the `room_id` string).

> https://hackmd.io/eQpyqCcRR-Gj-SWZcD-Fxg shows an algorithm for doing so.

Reviewer 15: I don't feel this needs clarifying in the MSC, but thank you.

> # Proposal for Matrix "spaces" (formerly known as "groups as rooms (take 2)")

Reviewer: A high level question: Where does this leave bridges, which currently automatically pool users matching a regex into a group via the registration file. Would the bridges need to start joining their users to a space room, which might end up being massively complex due to including every freenode nick evar into the room?

One idea might be to include a state event by the admin which just says "users matching this regex are part of this space, even thought they may not be joined"

Reviewer 3: what is the purpose of that group? for flair?

Author: yup.

Reviewer 3: Right, yes.

> One idea might be to include a state event by the admin which just says "users matching this regex are part of this space, even thought they may not be joined"

this seems like a nice solution here.

(an alternative might be a way to say "you can peek individual state events, but not peek the whole state")

Reviewer 29: Do note that it's not just used for the flair. In case of the Telegram and WhatsApp bridge by tulir it's also used to sort the bridged rooms and chats and make them easy to find and filter. By pressing just one button I can now see all my WhatsApp chats, I'd like to keep that feature.

Reviewer 30: I if understand the MSC correctly, bridges should:
* create an invite only room, declaring it as a space
* invite the bridge user in it
* declare in the space the room it creates
* and declare in the room the relation to the space

The feature "pressing a button to show only those space's rooms" is a feature that clients would have to implement.

About the flair (which is useful too, mostly to distinguish irc users in portal rooms), I don't know how it works today, and I don't know how it could work with this MSC.

Author: @biep this is an interesting idea (but please in future can you post on new threads rather than adding it to unrelated ones)?  the current threading approach used by cerulean building on MSC #2836 does model threads as rooms - and one could use this MSC to group said threads into a space, given it already supports generalised nested sets of rooms.

The idea of cross-posting by sending the same message somehow into an intersection of rooms feels orthogonal to how you'd actually define the spaces.  It's something that's come up a bunch on #2836, and the current proposal is to add a new MSC for symlinks to define messages which point cross-room to an origin message.  This is because entangling state resolution across unrelated rooms feels like a recipe for disaster (plus we want the ability to maintain separate metadata on the symlinks, given different rooms could have different visibility).  I suggest taking the "threads must be rooms!1!!" discussion to the threading MSC, if you must.

Reviewer 20: Thanks.
It is very related, though.
Instead of finding a solution for spaces (and then one for threads, and then one for cross-posting, and then one for tags, and then...) I propose:
- first to describe a good, simple and general model for structuring events and users,
- then to write an implementation for that,
- and finally to write simple front-ends for the various uses (here: spaces).

Reviewer 10: > One idea might be to include a state event by the admin which just says "users matching this regex are part of this space, even thought they may not be joined"

If we take this approach, we should probably be explicit about that variant of regex being the same as that used in AS prefix configuration ("POSIX extended regular expressions").

Reviewer 3: I'm going to close this thread for now, because I'm trying to reduce the scope of this MSC to bear bones, and to reflect what we're actually doing. Extending spaces to support the bridge usecase is very much a project for the future.

In this document, the existing implementation will be referred to as
"`/r0/groups`".

This proposal suggests a new approach where spaces are themselves represented
by rooms, rather than a custom first-class entity.  This requires few server
changes, other than better support for peeking (see Dependencies below). The
existing `/r0/groups` API would be deprecated in Synapse and remain
unspecified.

## Proposal

Each space is represented by its own room, known as a "space-room". The rooms
within the space are determined by state events within the space-room.

Spaces are referred to primarily by their alias, for example
`#foo:matrix.org`.

Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the `m.room.type`
of `m.space` (see
[MSC1840](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840)). XXX nobody has
convinced me this is actually required.

We introduce an `m.space.child` state event type, which defines the rooms
within the space. The `state_key` is an alias for a child room, and `present:
true` key is included to distinguish from a deleted state event. Something
like:

```js
{
    "type": "m.space.child",
    "state_key": "#room1:example.com",
    "contents": {

>         "present": true

Author: Something that @cloudrac3r raised in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#pullrequestreview-512353597 which is missing from the proposal is the ability for the space's admin to specify a static ordering of the space's children.   This is definitely desirable from an ergonomics perspective (and for parity with Discord & chums).  Might specifying an `order` param which gives a string used for lexicographic ordering be sufficient?

Reviewer 6: I think that's a good way of doing it. If some rooms have `order`, then the client should order them based on the value of the string, and rooms without `order` go to the bottom. If no rooms in the group have `order`, then the client can use any ordering that it deems appropriate.

Reviewer 3: `order` is now covered in the proposal.

changes, other than better support for peeking (see Dependencies below). The
existing `/r0/groups` API would be deprecated in Synapse and remain
unspecified.

## Proposal

Each space is represented by its own room, known as a "space-room". The rooms
within the space are determined by state events within the space-room.

Spaces are referred to primarily by their alias, for example
`#foo:matrix.org`.

Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the `m.room.type`
of `m.space` (see
[MSC1840](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840)). XXX nobody has
convinced me this is actually required.

Space-rooms may have `m.room.name` and `m.room.topic` state events in the same
way as a normal room.

Normal messages within a space-room are discouraged (but not blocked by the
server): user interfaces are not expected to have a way to enter or display
such messages.

### Membership of spaces

Users can be members of spaces (represented by `m.room.member` state events as
normal). The existing [`m.room.history_visibility`
mechanism](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#room-history-visibility)

> controls whether membership of the space is required to view the room list,

Reviewer 3: I'm pretty sure `history_visibitity` is the relevant setting here.

membership list, etc.

"Public" or "community" spaces would be set to `world_readable` to allow clients
to see the directory of rooms within the space by peeking into the space-room
(thus avoiding the need to add `m.room.member` events to the event graph within
the room).

Join rules, invites and 3PID invites work as for a normal room.

### Relationship between rooms and spaces

The intention is that rooms and spaces form a hierarchy, which clients can use
to structure the user's room list into a tree view. The parent/child
relationship can be expressed in one of two ways:

 1. The admins of a space can advertise rooms and subspaces for their space by
    setting `m.space.child` state events. The `state_key` is an alias for a
    child room or space, and `present: true` key is included to distinguish
    from a deleted state event. Something like:

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",

>         "state_key": "#room1:example.com",

Reviewer 5: Why not allow both an alias or a room ID for child (parent) identifiers?

In work we are wanting to use spaces for this one new feature, but we have a bot dynamically add and remove short-lived rooms. In our specific usecase room IDs would make more sense, since the room will die before an update is needed anyways.

Reviewer 3: that sounds unnecessarily complicated.

Reviewer 5: Aliases have an extra lookup step, so aliases are more complicated than room IDs.

And, in fact, raw room IDs are *very* necessary: Not every room in a space may have an alias. Heck, so that spaces can replace tags what was one of the ideas, it is a hard requirement that rooms without aliases must be able to be added, too.

Reviewer 5: And soru literally described another usecase that plopped up in her work for needing only room IDs for spaces

Reviewer 3: yes, so let's just use room IDs.

Reviewer 3: resolving this in favour of the existing thread about room IDs vs room aliases at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r514648501.

        "content": {
            "present": true
        }
    }

    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "#room2:example.com",
        "content": {
            "present": true,
            "order": "abcd",
            "default": true
        }
    }

    // no longer a child room
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "#oldroom:example.com",
        "content": {}
    }
    ```

    Children where `present` is not present or is not set to `true` are ignored.

    The `order` key is a string which is used to provide a default ordering of
    siblings in the room list. (Rooms are sorted based on a lexicographic

>     ordering of of `order` vales; rooms with no `order` come last. `order`s

Author: ```suggestion
    ordering of `order` values; rooms with no `order` come last. `order`s
```

plus we probably need to specify a max length, and how to handle collisions.

    which are not strings, or do not consist solely of ascii characters in the
    range `\x20` (space) to `\x7F` (`~`) are forbidden and should be ignored if
    received.)

    If `default` is set to `true`, that indicates a "default child": see [below](#default-children).

    XXX if we use aliases here, what happens when the alias gets repointed and
    we don't know about it? Or we are already in a room which *claims* to be
    `#room1:example.com`, but actually isn't? Probably room IDs (+ vias) would
    be better, though the interaction with room upgrades would need
    considering.

 2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via `m.room.parent` state
    events, where the `state_key` is the alias (?) of the parent space:

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.room.parent",
        "state_key": "#space1:example.com",
        "content": {
            "present": true
        }
    }
    ```

    In this case, after a user joins such a room, the client could optionally
    start peeking into the parent space, enabling it to find other rooms in
    that space and group them together.

>     XXX how do we avoid abuse where randoms claim that their room is part of a

Author: one option is to only honour `m.room.parent` if the parent room shares an admin user with this room, which would have permission to set `m.room.parent`.

Reviewer 3: so something like: only honour the `parent` relationship if there is at least one user who has the required power levels to send both an `m.space.parent` in the child *and* an `m.space.child` in the parent?

I'm worried that will just lead to randoms who want their room to appear as part of a space fiddling the PLs in their room to make it match. (eg, by lowering the PL needed to send an `m.space.parent`, or by granting a high PL to space admins who don't really want it).

    space it's not?

>     XXX do we need an "order" in this direction too?

Author: nope

Author: although i guess it could conceivably include an order param which could be used by the parent to put a hidden child in the 'right' place among its siblings.  this feels like a bit of an edge case though, especially if users can order it manually themselves.

> This structure means that rooms can end up with multiple parents. This implies

Author: I still think we need a way of marking one of the parents as canonical, unfortunately. As @nadonomy pointed out on when talking this through yesterday (Fri Oct 30th), the best practice for most client UX will be to show a room in the context of a single space.  Therefore even if the protocol supports multiple parents (which is definitely desirable for flexibility), we still need to make sure clients which need to tiebreak between the parents are consistent in the one they pick.

Reviewer 3: I am *still* struggling to grasp the value of listing a "non-canonical" parent.

Reviewer 30: isn't the canonical parent just declared with `m.room.parent`?

Author: the current example given above implies rooms can only have one `m.room.parent` (and we would track any other "spaces which happen to have this space/room as a child" elsewhere).  So this paragraph is now confusing at best.

that the room will appear multiple times in the room list hierarchy.

In a typical hierarchy, we expect *both* parent->child and child->parent
relationships to exist, so that the space can be discovered from the room, and
vice versa. Occasions when the relationship only exists in one direction
include:

 * User-curated lists of rooms: in this case the space will not be listed as a
   parent of the room.

 * "Secret" rooms: rooms where the admin does not want the room to be
   advertised as part of a given space, but *does* want the room to form part

>    of the heirarchy of that space for those in the know.

Author: ```suggestion
   of the hierarchy of that space for those in the know.
```

### Sub-spaces

XXX: Questions to be answered here include:

 * Should membership of a sub-space grant any particular access to the parent
   space, or vice-versa? We might need to extend `m.room.history_visibility` to
   support more flexibility; fortunately this is not involved in event auth so
   does not require new room versions.

 * What happens if somebody defines a cycle? (It's probably fine, but anything
   interpreting the relationships needs to be careful to limit recursion.)

### Default children

The `default` flag on a child listing allows a space admin to list the
"default" sub-spaces and rooms in that space. This means that when a user joins
the parent space, they will automatically be joined to those default
children. XXX implement this on the client or server?

Clients could display the default children in the room list whenever the space
appears in the list.

> XXX: do we need force-joins, where users may not leave a room they autojoined?

Reviewer 3: it's hard to enforce over federation. I am minded to descope for now.

> XXX: do we need force-joins, where users may not leave a room they autojoined?

Reviewer 5: We already have somewhat broken communities, wasn't the point of spaces to do them *correctly*? If you scroll up and read the other comments on this MSC or the discussion room, it has been a much-requested feature, showing that there *is* both desire and use for this.

> XXX: do we need force-joins, where users may not leave a room they autojoined?

Reviewer 3: I reject the assertion that we need to fix everything at once.

### Long description

We would like to allow spaces to have a long description using rich
formatting. This will use a new state event type `m.room.description` (with
empty `state_key`) whose content is the same format as `m.room.message` (ie,

> contains a `msgtype` and possibly `formatted_body`).

Reviewer 3: sure

TODO: this could also be done via pinned messages. Failing that
`m.room.description` should probably be a separate MSC.

### Inheritance of power-levels

XXX: this section still in progress

XXX: make it clear that "child rooms" here are not necessarily actually children...

One use-case for spaces is to help manage power levels across a group of
rooms. For example: "Jim has just joined the management team at my company. He
should have moderator rights across all of the company rooms."

Since the event-authorisation rules cannot easily be changed, we must map any
changes in space membership onto real `m.room.power_levels` events in the child
rooms.

There are two parts to this: one, indicating the relationship, and second, the
mechanics of propagating changes into real `m.room.power_levels` events.

> #### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

Reviewer 5: Also how will this work with role-based permissions? https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2812

Reviewer 3: I don't think we need to resolve that right now.

> #### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

Reviewer 3: Don't really follow what this means.

> #### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

Reviewer 5: Alice gets PL 50 in the space. Now, there are three sub-rooms, 1, 2 and 3. Due to PL inheritance alice *would* have PL 50 in all of them.

However, Bob, the admin, says an override for alice in sub-room 1 to have PL 99 and in sub-room 2 to have PL 0. As sub-room 3 does not have an override for alice specifically, alice still have PL 50 there.

This simple example shows that we can't just take "highest powerlevel", as else alice would have PL 50 in sub-room 2.

> #### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

Reviewer 3: > Due to PL inheritance alice would have PL 50 in all of them

this seems like a poor assumption. It depends how we choose to represent the mappings?

> #### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

Reviewer 5: Is that not what PL inheritence is suppossed to mean? It sounds like this MSC needs some clarification on that, then

> #### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

Reviewer 3: well, the first paragraph of the section (after "XXX: this section still in progress"...) tries to explain what it's meant to mean. I didn't think that there was any implication that PLs were expected to be the same everywhere, but if you have suggestions for a clearer title, that would be appreciated.

> #### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

Reviewer 3: in fact this is clearly spelt out as a problem in some of the proposed solutions: 

> Problem 2: No scope for nuance, where different rooms have slightly different PLs.

   Question: is it safe to use an alias to refer to a space here? What happens
   if the alias gets repointed and we don't notice?

   XXX Question: currently there are restrictions which stop users assigning PLs
   above their own current power level. Do we need to replicate these
   restrictions? If so, that probably necessitates changes to event auth? (Does
   anyone actually make use of allowing non-admins to send PL events today?)

#### Propagating changes into rooms

Several options:

 * Push-based options:

   * We require any user who is an admin in the space (ie, anyone who has
     permission to change the access rights in the space) to also be admins
     and members of any child rooms.

     Say Bob is an admin in #doglovers and makes a change that should be
     propagated to all children of that space. His server is then responsible
     for generating a power-levels event on his behalf for each room.

     Problem: Bob may not want to be a member of all such rooms.

   * We nominate a non-human "group admin" which is responsible for propagating
     the changes into child rooms. It observes changes made in the parent space

>      and performs the necessary copying actions.

Reviewer 6: So if I've got this right, it would be a mysterious opaque bot accessing the world as a client and it's responsible for synchronising power levels from spaces to rooms? So it would need room admin in all the rooms it controls, so it can set new power levels state?

I think this is a terrible idea: Who can run a bot? Who would maintain the bot's code? What happens if we end up with one public space admin bot that almost everybody uses across the entire matrix network, which makes its way into hundreds of thousands of rooms as a room admin, and then the bot decides it's time to turn evil?

Can you make the homeserver(s) do it instead? This seems like a task that the homeserver(s) should solve rather than requiring clients to correctly implement a very important synchronisation operation and not break the world in the case of a network failure partway through.

Reviewer 3: the "bot" would be part of the homeserver implementation.

   `m.room.power_level_mappings` event suggested above.

   Problem: Requires clients to distinguish between rooms where there is an
   automated mapper, and those where the client should manipulate the PLs
   directly. (Maybe that's not so bad? The presence of the `mappings` event
   should be enough? But still sucks that there are two ways to do the same
   thing, and clients which don't support spaces will get it wrong.)

### Membership restrictions

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of
their room based on the membership of spaces (for example, "only members of the
#doglovers space can join this room"<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>).

XXX can we maybe do this with invites generated on demand? If not, we probably
need some sort of "silent invite" state for each user,

By implication, when a user leaves the required space, they should be ejected
from the room.

XXX: how do we implement the ejection? We could leave it up to the ejectee's
server, but what happens if it doesn't play the game? So we probably need to
enact a ban... but then, which server has responisiblity, and which user is used?

> 

Reviewer 5: Either soru missed it, or the changes don't touch exclusive rooms yet, where exclusive is that if you want to be able to join said room you *have* to be in a space.

Exclusive and required make sense separately. A room may be required but not exclusive, and a room may be exclusive but not required. Or a room may be both exclusive and required.

Reviewer 3: > if you want to be able to join said room you have to be in a space.

this is exactly what this section is aiming to discuss.

the room).

Join rules, invites and 3PID invites work as for a normal room.

### Relationship between rooms and spaces

The intention is that rooms and spaces form a hierarchy, which clients can use
to structure the user's room list into a tree view. The parent/child
relationship can be expressed in one of two ways:

 1. The admins of a space can advertise rooms and subspaces for their space by
    setting `m.space.child` state events. The `state_key` is an alias for a
    child room or space, and `present: true` key is included to distinguish
    from a deleted state event. Something like:

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "#room1:example.com",
        "content": {
            "present": true
        }
    }

    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "#room2:example.com",
        "content": {
            "present": true,
            "order": "abcd",
            "default": true
        }
    }

    // no longer a child room
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "#oldroom:example.com",
        "content": {}
    }
    ```

    Children where `present` is not present or is not set to `true` are ignored.

>     The `order` key is a string which is used to provide a default ordering of

Reviewer 6: It's a bit weird that `order` here is a string but on user tags is a floating point number. There's nothing _wrong_ with this, it's just weird.

Reviewer 3: the use of floats on user tags is generally seen as a bug (cf https://github.com/vector-im/element-web/issues/3280).

user's displayname to advertise their membership of a space.)

The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar. (In future it might
preferable to use hand-crafted small resolution images: see
[matrix-doc#1778](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1778).

One way this might be implemented is:

 * User publishes the spaces they wish to announce on their profile
   ([MSC1769](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1769)
   as an `m.flair` state event: it lists the spaces which they are advertising.

 * When a client wants to know the current flair for a set of users (i.e.
   those which it is currently displaying in the timeline), it peeks the
   profile rooms of those users. (Ideally there would be an API to support
   peeking multiple rooms at once to facilitate this.)

 * The client must check that the user is *actually* a member of the advertised
   spaces. Nominally it can do this by peeking the membership list of the
   space; however for efficiency we could expose a dedicated Client-Server API
   to do this check (and both servers and clients can cache the results fairly
   aggressively.)

> 

Reviewer 31: To somebody unfamiliar with flairs (hi), they may imply endorsement rather than mere membership, which may be problematic for communities that are spaces which anybody to join.  Perhaps there should be a requirement for a certain role/permission in the space to allow wielding its flair.

Reviewer 32: I agree and I see two ways to solve this:
1) Do nothing, no spec change required: Instead of having one space, have multiple, and assign flairs to the spaces that require administrative operation to join. However, this hierarchy may be unclear to users unfamiliar with it.
2) Add support for multiple flairs (multiple avatars?) per room and ability to associate flairs to users (via administrative action)

Seems like there could be more overhead in the second solution (for implementations) while the first solution could have more administrative overhead.

Multiple avatars per room could work with an "additional avatar" list that associates identifiers to images, and then a room-specific way to associate its member to zero, one, or more flairs.

Reviewer 3: I'm not quite clear on the situation you are envisaging (or indeed, if you are both envisaging the same situation). My instinct is that we would use separate spaces for complex situations like this, but if one of you could give an example scenario, that might help confirm if we're on the same page.

Reviewer 31: I suppose this is more a general consideration for flairs, but I think it's relevant.  I imagine the room avatar for a space would be some sort of logo or identifier for the community.  Seeing such a logo next to a person's name in any chat implies association, if not straight up endorsement.  For a publicly-joinable space, it's a concern if anybody can wield its flair.  Feels to me like this should be typically reserved for moderators.

Reviewer 3: in this situation you'd use different spaces for moderators and regular users.

Reviewer 31: 1. If I'm the owner of a public space, and find it undesirable for members to wield a flair with the space's avatar, can I disable it?
2. This is minor, but it's not very useful for a flair that says "Community X moderators" to lead to an inaccessible/invite-only space when clicked, as opposed to the public "Community X" space.

Reviewer 3: I think you're confusing "this is one way we might implement this feature in the future" with "we have all the answers and it will definitely be like this".

Reviewer 24: There are definitely use-cases for flairs without endorsement. I've seen some support rooms rely a bit on it in cases like: "Oh, that user has an f-droid flair, they probably installed it from F-droid".

For a more specific example, the #pinephone:matrix.org room has flairs for:
* +team:postmarketos.org
* +postmarketos:matrix.org

With slightly different logos. The first identifies the core team and is invitation-only, the second identifies the rest of the community and users, and is freely joignable.

Currently, room admins get to pick which flairs are shown next to the username, which is a good solution IMO. Clients could elect to display other flairs in some cases, like hovering over a profile picture.

Reviewer 3: I'm going to resolve this thread for now, since flair is explicitly out of scope.

to see the directory of rooms within the space by peeking into the space-room
(thus avoiding the need to add `m.room.member` events to the event graph within
the room).

Join rules, invites and 3PID invites work as for a normal room.

### Relationship between rooms and spaces

The intention is that rooms and spaces form a hierarchy, which clients can use
to structure the user's room list into a tree view. The parent/child
relationship can be expressed in one of two ways:

 1. The admins of a space can advertise rooms and subspaces for their space by
    setting `m.space.child` state events. The `state_key` is the ID of a child
    room or space, and the content should ontain a `via` key which gives a list
    of candidate servers that can be used to join the room. `present: true` key
    is included to distinguish from a deleted state event. Something like:

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!abcd:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com", "test.org"],
            "present": true
        }
    }

    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!efgh:example.com",

>         "content": {

Author: We seem to have lost the `auto_join` flag, which is pretty important in terms of provisioning new users into a hierarchy of rooms for a space (e.g. a new Element employee getting force-joined to various important rooms)?

Reviewer 3: we decided there was no need to distinguish between auto-join and `default`.

   example "a new employee has joined my company and needs access to all of our
   rooms".
 * Letting users classify their rooms: for example, separating "work" from
   "personal" rooms.

We refer to such collections of rooms as "spaces".

Synapse and Element-Web currently implement an unspecced "groups" API (referred
to as "`/r0/groups`" in this document) which attempts to provide this
functionality (see
[matrix-doc#971](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/971)). However,
this is a complex API which has various problems (see
[appendix](#appendix-problems-with-the-r0groups-api)).

This proposal suggests a new approach where spaces are themselves represented
by rooms, rather than a custom first-class entity.  This requires few server
changes, other than better support for peeking (see Dependencies below).

The existing `/r0/groups` API would be deprecated in Synapse and remain
unspecified.

## Proposal

Each space is represented by its own room, known as a "space-room". The rooms
within the space are determined by state events within the space-room.

Spaces are referred to primarily by their alias, for example
`#foo:matrix.org`.

> Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the `m.room.type`

Reviewer 22: Can we use an immutable type set in `m.room.create` here rather?

The effort in a client to support a space being converted into a conversation room can go from trivial to quite complicated depending on how a client is implemented. For spaces (or any key-value store room type really) in Hydrogen, I would imagine a storage model that doesn't even look at non-state events at all and doesn't allocate fragments, deal with gaps, historical display names ... and just stores key value pairs.
Other parts of a conversation room, like the room summary are stored denormalized, and would require extra effort to build up given it is partially based on information that previously was discarded while the room was still a space.

In short: this is quite annoying for clients that want to store things in a denormalized state (which is not an uncommon strategy to make clients fast).

Reviewer 22: I also imagine this could be a source of common bugs, as the scenario for supporting this kind of switch would easily end up untested. If somebody discovers a bug, it might be usable for DDOSing.

Reviewer 22: For completeness, [a similar discussion](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840#discussion_r508562513) on #1840, although we might want to resolve the issue here independently of that MSC to unblock things.

Reviewer 12: Is there a reason behind making spaces visually indistinguishable from rooms? (Both looking hashmark+string.)

Reviewer 3: @grinapo: there's a previous thread on this at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r405933637. If you feel strongly that having rooms and spaces use the same alias format is a bad idea, please could you open a separate thread giving your reasons.

Reviewer 19: Element Web's WIP is using `"type": "m.space"` in the `m.room.create` event

Reviewer 19: Unstable Prefix `org.matrix.msc1772.type` in `m.room.create`'s content

Reviewer 5: There are legitimate usecases for a mutable type, though (e.g. un-marking and re-marking a room as DM). The discussion is probably better done at that other MSC, though.

    The `order` key is a string which is used to provide a default ordering of
    siblings in the room list. (Rooms are sorted based on a lexicographic
    ordering of `order` values; rooms with no `order` come last. `order`s which
    are not strings, or do not consist solely of ascii characters in the range
    `\x20` (space) to `\x7F` (`~`), or consist of more than 50 characters, are
    forbidden and should be ignored if received.)

    If `default` is set to `true`, that indicates a "default child": see [below](#default-children).

 2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via the `m.room.parent` state
    event:

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.room.parent",
        "state_key": "",
        "content": {
            "room_id": "!space:example.com",
            "via": ["example.com"]
        }
    }
    ```

    In this case, after a user joins such a room, the client could optionally
    start peeking into the parent space, enabling it to find other rooms in
    that space and group them together.

    To avoid abuse where a room admin falsely claims that a room is part of a
    space that it should not be, clients could ignore such `m.room.parent`

>     events unless their sender has a sufficient power-level to send an

Reviewer 22: Is this the power level at the time the event is set or at the time of checking the power level?

Reviewer 3: I was thinking of the latter: the PL at the time of checking.

Reviewer 22: This would indeed be easiest for clients to implement, and seems sensible :+1:

Reviewer 30: So what about this:
* T: a user had right to add a room to a space, and did it
* T+1: the user's rights are removed
* T+1: the room is removed from the space too?

Maybe the space's admin wanted to reject this user admin rights but not remove the room from the space.

Reviewer 22: Hmm, the power level checking does seem a bit error prone ... how about supporting secret rooms by adding a hash of the room id to the space and not faff around with power levels at all? This way you can test for room membership if you just know about the room id though and are not a member.

If that would be a requirement, we could instead set a shared secret in a a state event in both the room and space, with the state event in the room also containing the space id.

Reviewer 3: > how about supporting secret rooms by adding a hash of the room id to the space and not faff around with power levels at all?

we considered that. I think @ara4n didn't want to even leak the presence of the secret room.

> If that would be a requirement, 

sorry, if *what* would be a requirement?

Reviewer 22: > sorry, if _what_ would be a requirement?

Not being able to test for space membership without being a member of the room ... but you've already answered that given we don't want to leak the presence of the secret room

Reviewer 30: So to summarize:
* we want to support secret rooms, i.e. rooms that declare a space in their state but which are not declared in the space
* we want to check that the user as the right to add a room to a space

But checking the right to add a room is a complex task. The rule is "a m.room.parent" event is OK if the user has the right to send a "m.space.child" event in the specified space. This implies to get the power levels state _at the time_ the "m.room.parent" was sent. If we don't keep this "at the time" constraint, it could behaves in unexpected ways. Doing this check at the client level would add a lot of complexity into clients (and a lot of new ways to misbehave).

I get that this MSC tries to minimize the server work, but I think the only good solution here is to check the rights when the event is sent, and not when a client read it. Which means that the server has to do it. And so the clients can just blindly trust "m.room.parent" events.

As this MSC actually already need some work to be done by the server (the admin bot), adding this check when sending a "m.room.parent" event does seem to be a big issue to me (but I don't develop any HS ^^').

Reviewer 30: Hmm I now see a potential issue with my proposal. Imagine that a user added a room to a space by sending a `m.room.parent` event, the rights are ok. Now this user removed from the space and the fun begins.

If we check rights at the time the event is sent, the room is still in the space. But what if a space admin want to remove the room from the space **and** there is not more space admins which are also admins in the room? (and no mapping does that)

If we just check the rights at the time of reading the event it is ok. The room is removed from the space, which still feels weird but an admin can add it again (a space's admin or a room's admin). Maybe this is the best solution…

Reviewer 3: Another problem with checking for "PL at the time the event was sent" is that, in a distributed system, we cannot tell what the state in one room was when an event happened in another.

Generally I'm pretty convinced we just want to check the *current* PL in the space is. I agree it might feel a bit odd if a room is removed from a space as a side-effect of a user's PL changing, but I don't think it's that bad, and it's a bit of an edge-case.

Reviewer 5: It is an edge-case that is bound to happen, cause confusion and lead to bad UX :/

Not sure what the best approach here is, either, but this does seem somewhat problematic.

Just to clarify: For personal category-spaces, you could have in the space multiple `m.space.shild` events without each child room having an `m.space.parent`, right?

Reviewer 5: > It is an edge-case that is bound to happen, cause confusion and lead to bad UX :/

And probably not even that much an edge-case, but more a normal case. Imagine a larger community where over longer times. Admins are *bound* to cycle in and out, so it is only a matter of time this happens at larger scale and confuses people.

To fix non-secret rooms, it could be updated that of a space also claims the room as a child the parent event is valid either way, and the PL check is only happening if the space is *not* claiming the room as a child.

Reviewer 8: I agree that this is really a long-term footgun for many open source projects adopting matrix, leaders of communities should be able to hand over their communities to people as they need to move on without having to worry about them giving up PL 100 will break the room tree for all the users.

> it could be updated that of a space also claims the room as a child the parent event is valid either way, and the PL check is only happening if the space is not claiming the room as a child

this suggestion seems very sensible to me, it mitigates the worst of the problem, and makes manually fixing it probably a lot easier for many people.

Reviewer 3: > > it could be updated that of a space also claims the room as a child the parent event is valid either way, and the PL check is only happening if the space is not claiming the room as a child
> 
> this suggestion seems very sensible to me, it mitigates the worst of the problem, and makes manually fixing it probably a lot easier for many people.

Agreed. Done in 0bdbec23, and a note about the issue added in 6c9d469d.

I'm going to close this thread now, as I think we're basically agreed that it's as good as it's going to get.

    into appropriate semantics is needed.

This structure means that rooms can end up with multiple parents. This implies
that the room will appear multiple times in the room list hierarchy.

In a typical hierarchy, we expect *both* parent->child and child->parent
relationships to exist, so that the space can be discovered from the room, and
vice versa. Occasions when the relationship only exists in one direction
include:

 * User-curated lists of rooms: in this case the space will not be listed as a
   parent of the room.

 * "Secret" rooms: rooms where the admin does not want the room to be
   advertised as part of a given space, but *does* want the room to form part
   of the hierarchy of that space for those in the know.

Cycles in the parent->child and child->parent relationships are *not*
permitted, but clients (and servers) should be aware that they may be
encountered, and ignore the relationship rather than recursing infinitely.

### Default children

The `default` flag on a child listing allows a space admin to list the
"default" sub-spaces and rooms in that space. This means that when a user joins
the parent space, they will automatically be joined to those default

> children.

Reviewer 12: This would be better called `auto_join`, which also suggest there could be other automatically_happening_on_join events happening. (I am not sure at the moment what these events would be.) 
For example the space may flag various rooms for room state event egalisation, like anyone joining the space getting a specific minimal state in the rooms, like power level or flair; or flag rooms getting space-wide settings like bans.

It would a different approach to make it the reverse direction, eg. the room can set that parent is allowed for state spreading: it depends how a room admin can allow or reject a room to be a member of a space, and how the space admin can do the same. (Right now I would say room admins have power over their rooms and shall enable spaces supervision, rather than the reverse, but I may be wrong.)

For me word "default" rather suggests the "main" room, visually top of the room list, where the "main" discussion of the space takes place, and may or may not be automatically joined; kind of a space lobby.

Author: agreed.

appears in the list.

### Long description

We would like to allow spaces to have a long description using rich
formatting. This will use a new state event type `m.room.description` (with
empty `state_key`) whose content is the same format as `m.room.message` (ie,
contains a `msgtype` and possibly `formatted_body`).

TODO: this could also be done via pinned messages. Failing that
`m.room.description` should probably be a separate MSC.

### Managing power levels via spaces

TODO: much of this is orthogonal to the headline feature of "spaces", and
should be moved to a separate MSC.

One use-case for spaces is to help manage power levels across a group of
rooms. For example: "Jim has just joined the management team at my company. He
should have moderator rights across all of the company rooms."

Since the event-authorisation rules cannot easily be extended to consider
membership in other rooms, we must map any changes in space membership onto
real `m.room.power_levels` events.

#### Extending the power_levels event

We now have a mix of manually- and automatically- maintained power-level
data. To support this, we extend the existing `m.room.power_levels` event to

> add an `auto_users` key:

Reviewer 33: Who or what is responsible for editing `auto_users`? I don't see it mentioned in the rest of this proposal.

Reviewer 30: That's explained in the "Implementing the mapping" section. A bot (implemented by the HS) looks at spaces and fills `auto_users`.

This could probably be more explicit.

Reviewer 3: have tried to clarify; thanks.

key which is an ordered list, for example:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.power_level_mappings",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "mappings": [
            {
                "space": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
                "power_level": 50
            },
            {
                "space": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
                "power_level": 1
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a new `m.room.power_levels` event would be generated whenever
the membership of either `!mods` or `!users` changes. If a user is in both
spaces, `!mods` takes priority because that is listed first.

If `mappings` is not a list, the whole event is ignored. Any entries in the list
which do not match the expected format are ignored.

#### Implementing the mapping

When a new room is created, the server implicitly adds a "room admin bot" to
the room, with the maximum power-level of any of the initial users.
(Homeservers should implement this "bot" internally, rather than requiring
separate software to be installed.)

It is proposed that this "admin bot" use the special user ID with empty

> localpart `@:example.com`.

Reviewer 24: Why make that specific choice ? This is [explicitly disallowed](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#user-identifiers) at the beginning of the spec:
> The localpart of a user ID is an opaque identifier for that user. It MUST NOT be empty, and MUST contain only the characters `a-z`, `0-9`, `.`, `_`, `=`, `-`, and `/`.

Moreover, some users named like this [seem to have appeared](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/3832#issuecomment-728930581), which can spell trouble for spec-compliant implementations.

I can also make the case that this username:
- isn't obvious to a user, even an advanced one inspecting room state if clients decide to hide it
- is terrible to look up, in the spec on on the Internet.

Why not make it something:
* Obvious
* Searchable
* Allowed in the spec

Maybe carve a section of identifiers reserved for future use in the spec, like `@_matrix_*:example.com`, or `mx`. This could then be `@_mx_spaces:example.com`.

Reviewer 30: > Maybe carve a section of identifiers reserved for future use in the spec, like @_matrix_*:example.com, or mx. This could then be @_mx_spaces:example.com.

This is probably a good idea to be future proof.

Reviewer 3: > this is explicitly disallowed at the beginning of the spec:

for what it's worth, I don't see why we should be bound by what the spec currently says in a Matrix Spec *Change* proposal.

As for what we actually call the special user id in question: I think it's a bit of a bikeshed question.

Reviewer 24: That's a fair point. But in my opinion, disruptive spec changes should be avoided as much as possible. There is a difference between extending the spec and breaking compatibility. Breaking changes are sometimes necessary, IMO they should be versioned if possible.

If the spec has breaking changes with every MSC, being spec-compliant will be very hard. Not to mention that this MSC will likely be implemented before the spec is released, **making servers implementing it non-compliant with released spec versions**.

That issue might not be breaking synapse or Element. I haven't checked Dendrite or , but at least construct is affected in a bad way. Being spec-compliant, it rejects these events, thus the room state can diverge from synapse. I haven't tried how clients behave with this, but it wouldn't surprise me if they were to break.

In this case, the breaking change easy to avoid, so it should be avoided IMO. This is not bikeshedding.

What's bikeshedding is selecting a spec-compliant user id. I leave that to others, namely the MSC author(s), and merely offered a possible way and a few concerns, but I don't feel strongly about it.

This is not meant as a personal attack, I just pointed out a spec incompatibility, that's what reviews are for :) You are free to ignore it, but I'd like you not to.

Author: the reason i proposed it as `@:example.com` is *because* it's currently explicitly disallowed as a valid matrix ID - and so we can steal it for the "user which represents a server" without risk of colliding with any other namespaces. Given the user may not even be exposed to clients, I don't think we should get too hung up on it.

This bot is then responsible for monitoring the `power_level_mappings` state,
and peeking into any spaces mentioned in the content. It can then issue new
`m.room.power_levels` events whenever the membership of the spaces in question

> changes.

Reviewer 30: Related to [this comment](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772/files/39af7f32494b849880ddf1cc0bfe5a93313d2ab1#r527584873), it could be specified here that the bot must fill the `auto_users` part of the `m.room.power_levels` event.

Reviewer 3: done; thanks.

It is possible that the admin bot is unable to perform the mapping (for
example, the space cannot be peeked; or the membership of the space is so large
that it cannot be expanded into a single `m.room.power_levels` event). It is
proposed that the bot could notify the room of any problems via
`m.room.message` messages of type `m.msgtype`.

Clearly, updating this event type is extremely powerful. It is expected that
access to it is itself restricted via `power_levels`. This could be enforced by
the admin bot so that no `m.room.power_levels` events are generated unless
`power_level_mappings` is appropriately restricted.

Some sort of rate-limiting may be required to handle the case where the mapped
space has a high rate of membership churn.

#### Alternatives

> Things that were considered and dismissed:

Reviewer 12: I have read the above and dismissed ideas but I am not sure whether the following was in:

The space has an automatically existing user, like @_space_whatever:example.com, which joins all member rooms (unless forbidden). 
The specific room admins may or may not assign an elevated power level to this user. (This may be a part of the room joining the space, or acknowledging it.) (It is advised not to give space_user a level equal to the room creator/highest level user.)

This space_user would act on space defined states, like
- if the space defines a room as user_level_inheriting, then tries to set space userlevel for a user in the room, too.
- if ban_inheriting, .... same. 
And same for whatever event we have.

Space admins who have power to set events in the space room may do that, and space_user would reflect these in rooms it has the power to (and possibly the room member events in the space room define as).

If a room admin disagrees with the space admin s/he kickbans the space user.

This machanism may let all and any events reflected in the member rooms without the need to tell _now_ what these events may be in the future.

Reviewer 3: we did consider a pseudo-user-per-space, but it felt a bit redundant. What would be the advantage over having a single pseudo-user which can work on all spaces?

Beyond the userid, I'm not clear how your suggestion differs from our existing proposal?

Reviewer 12: > we did consider a pseudo-user-per-space, but it felt a bit redundant. What would be the advantage over having a single pseudo-user which can work on all spaces?

_Why a "normal" [looking] user?_ 
Handled as a normal user: have to join the room to be there, have to possess levels to do actions, can be kicked or banned. This machanism is already in place and requires no additional spec.

_Why multiple users?_ 
Since a room can be a part of multiple spaces (as far as I understand) there would be no way to allow SpaceX but reject SpaceY in a specific room to make actions when the room is included in both.

> Beyond the userid, I'm not clear how your suggestion differs from our existing proposal?

It was not clear to me how the proposal handles the possible differences (or power split) between space admin(s) and room admin(s).
Also I'd kind of prefer not to create _more_ spec than necessary, and reuse already existing functions. If the proposal just does that then I was mistaken and superfluous.

Author: per-space bots (or puppeting a real admin user for the space) is certainly interesting to just make the problem of "who is tweaking the PLs"? a purely social admin one - especially if you have multiple admins trying to compete for control of the same room, as per grin's example.

   example "a new employee has joined my company and needs access to all of our
   rooms".
 * Letting users classify their rooms: for example, separating "work" from
   "personal" rooms.

We refer to such collections of rooms as "spaces".

Synapse and Element-Web currently implement an unspecced "groups" API (referred
to as "`/r0/groups`" in this document) which attempts to provide this
functionality (see
[matrix-doc#971](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/971)). However,
this is a complex API which has various problems (see
[appendix](#appendix-problems-with-the-r0groups-api)).

This proposal suggests a new approach where spaces are themselves represented
by rooms, rather than a custom first-class entity.  This requires few server
changes, other than better support for peeking (see Dependencies below).

The existing `/r0/groups` API would be deprecated in Synapse and remain
unspecified.

## Proposal

Each space is represented by its own room, known as a "space-room". The rooms
within the space are determined by state events within the space-room.

Spaces are referred to primarily by their alias, for example
`#foo:matrix.org`.

> Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the `m.room.type`

Reviewer 3: I believe this is a lie. Spaces are distinguished by having `"org.matrix.msc1772.type": "org.matrix.msc1772.space"` (presumably, later, `type: space`) in the create event. 

(Aside: I am deeply unconvinced of the wisdom of using unstable identifiers here: it means that any spaces created before MSC1772 is finalised will turn into regular rooms at some point in the future once we drop support for the unstable identifiers)

Reviewer 3: I'm still unconvinced of the wisdom of unstable identifiers, but the intention is that we will merge this MSC and switch to stable identifiers before moving this feature out of labs, and everybody will have to recreate any spaces they've made up to that point.

I've updated the text here in 1cfe6bc0.

of `m.space` (see
[MSC1840](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840)). This allows
clients to offer slightly customised user experience depending on the purpose
of the room.

Space-rooms may have `m.room.name` and `m.room.topic` state events in the same
way as a normal room.

Normal messages within a space-room are discouraged (but not blocked by the

> server): user interfaces are not expected to have a way to enter or display

Reviewer 19: Should clients create rooms with events_default at PL100 or even greater to prevent the timeline being abused to spam clients of users in the space-room in a way which moderation would never catch but still yield a degreaded experience for those users now syncing possibly lots of additional data which their clients won't even render?

such messages.

### Membership of spaces

Users can be members of spaces (represented by `m.room.member` state events as
normal). The existing [`m.room.history_visibility`
mechanism](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#room-history-visibility)
controls whether membership of the space is required to view the room list,
membership list, etc.

"Public" or "community" spaces would be set to `world_readable` to allow clients
to see the directory of rooms within the space by peeking into the space-room
(thus avoiding the need to add `m.room.member` events to the event graph within
the room).

> Join rules, invites and 3PID invites work as for a normal room.

Reviewer 19: `invite_state` sent along with Invites should be amended to include the event containing the type `m.space` to allow clients to discern whether an invite is to a space-room.

Reviewer 19: potentially other metadata too, like what rooms are in the space maybe.

Reviewer 20: Copied here in answer to @deepbluev7's request - I hope this is what (s)he meant..

There are many ways people may want to organise messages and users. Rooms are currently paramount, but threads and (decent) communities are often asked.
It would be wrong to create ad-hoc implementations for such - we cannot foresee what other use cases may pop up, and it reduplicates work.
There ought to be one single organising unit - why not (generalised) rooms, and interfaces can then use those in various ways. So if rooms can intersect (in the model - we may want to make this impossible in certain cases in practice for efficiency reasons), we can have rooms within rooms, where the user can decide to see the higher room as a community, or the lower one as a thread.
Crossposting will then automatically be supported: one simply posts in the union of the rooms one wants to address, and no-one will see the message (as unread) more than once.
A user may decide only to read messages in the intersection of two rooms, e.g. Linux and Synapse - and is thus able to carve out a precise area of interest.
And so on.
Spaces would then be pointers to rooms, and adding a room R to a space S would basically mean a new assignment:
S <- S union R.

I am afraid that implementing partial solutions will only prevent this simple model from ever becoming reality.

Since in this model, a union of rooms is a room again, servers can describe to other servers the room they are interested in - the unions of the rooms the users are interested in. This description may be optimised by standard set-theoretic simplification rules (the union of A and A is simply A, and so on), and restrictions may be added to keep transfer of messages within that room feasible. If we see the empty room at the bottom, and the universal room at the top, there may be a horizontal line (corresponding to the current rooms) where rooms must be disjunct (corresponding to the current rooms). This is an executive restriction, not one on the model, and it may be relaxed or changed as efficient algorithms for dealing with lattices are found.

Reviewer 3: @Biep I'm not really following what you're asking for here, but I think it's unrelated to @t3chguy's point. please can you start a new thread by commenting on a line on https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772/files? If your comment doesn't apply to any particular part of the MSC then you can just comment on the first line.

### Relationship between rooms and spaces

The intention is that rooms and spaces form a hierarchy, which clients can use
to structure the user's room list into a tree view. The parent/child
relationship can be expressed in one of two ways:

 1. The admins of a space can advertise rooms and subspaces for their space by
    setting `m.space.child` state events. The `state_key` is the ID of a child

>     room or space, and the content should contain a `via` key which gives a list

Reviewer 19: So in the case of a new room being added to a space that list of via's will just be a single server, the one on which the user creating the room is. Is there going to be a mechanism to incrementally update all these `via`s as they could go stale.

Author: this feels like a concrete advantage of using an alias rather than a room_id (as well as then getting room upgrades for free).

Reviewer 19: Agreed but both problems still stand for rooms without aliases, e.g private ones or ones which are created as part of Space creation in EleWeb where you are just asked for Room Names

>     of candidate servers that can be used to join the room. `present: true` key

Reviewer 5: An interesting idea for a future MSC: Some mechanism to completely delete a state / account data / room account data / whatever

Author: please file unrelated stuff like this as separate GH issues rather than adding noise to an already overnoisey MSC...

    is included to distinguish from a deleted state event. Something like:

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!abcd:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com", "test.org"],
            "present": true
        }
    }

    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!efgh:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com"],
            "present": true,
            "order": "abcd",
            "default": true
        }
    }

    // no longer a child room
    {
        "type": "m.space.child",
        "state_key": "!jklm:example.com",
        "content": {}

>     }

Reviewer 34: er... so, basically, you know which rooms were part of a given space, even if they were removed (redacted) from it? (say, the room owner decided to leave, or the room was banned, etc...)
Wouldn’t this cause issues on the privacy side of things?

I know how much rework would be needed to avoid that, sorry.

Reviewer 19: Given that the timeline history will contain everything anyhow I'm not sure how that's a concern, plus this is the parent->child side of the relationship which does not require any agreement from the child. Any user can spin up their own personal "collection" Space to organise rooms they are interested in (by creating these state events using room_ids they do not control)

    ```

    Children where `present` is not present or is not set to `true` are ignored.

    The `order` key is a string which is used to provide a default ordering of
    siblings in the room list. (Rooms are sorted based on a lexicographic
    ordering of `order` values; rooms with no `order` come last. `order`s which
    are not strings, or do not consist solely of ascii characters in the range
    `\x20` (space) to `\x7F` (`~`), or consist of more than 50 characters, are

>     forbidden and should be ignored if received.)

Reviewer 3: @joepie wrote:

> Why should it be ignored, rather than the entry being rejected as 'invalid'?
> ...
> IMO it's much preferable to catch broken entries early by expecting clients to reject them,

The intention of this wording was to get as close as I could to preventing people going outside the spec. I'm not really following what you're suggesting here though: that the client completely ignore `m.room.child` events with an invalid `order`? I'm not sure that does much to prevent people inventing stuff for custom behaviour on custom clients?

>     forbidden and should be ignored if received.)

Reviewer 3: @joepie91 I'm closing this thread for now; if you want to clarify your proposal, we can reopen.

    If `default` is set to `true`, that indicates a "default child": see [below](#default-children).

>  2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via the `m.room.parent` state

Author: `parents` or `parent`? the example JSON shows us only able to set a single parent on a room now (i assume that the idea is that this is the canonical parent for a space, and backlinks to other spaces which claim to have this space as a child could be maintained elsewhere, which is currently unspecified?)

Reviewer 3: each room can claim *a* parent

>  2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via the `m.room.parent` state

Reviewer 15: can a room self-unsubscribe from a space by clearing its parent or changing it? This would create a situation where a space thinks it has a child but the child says it belongs to something else - does the parent->child link take precedence or do both events have to agree for it to be valid?

Reviewer 30: That's not a problem, isn't? As anybody can create a space and puts rooms in it, this situation will happen a lot.

`m.space.child` does not implies `m.room.parent`, and vice versa. The relationship is one way only.

>  2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via the `m.room.parent` state

Reviewer 5: What if the parent claimed is not a room of type `m.space`?

Reviewer 35: Well, it may be `dev.neko.issue_tracker`. Not sure how it would be handled in that case, just saying that it may be useful with other types of rooms.

Author: > Or is the room type merely used for cosmetic purposes to easily indicate the client on how to render / present that room?

this.

>  2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via the `m.room.parent` state

Reviewer 5: Can we change it so that multiple parents can be claimed? At work usecases are already plopping up for just that (can elaborate, if wanted). The parent state event could then be anolog to the child state event, where the state key is the room id.

Are there any downsides to this? Why were multiple parents removed?

Reviewer 19: The primary use case of parents in the Wireframes was which Space to show when peeking into a Room as its canonical parent which you are likely going to be interested in. E.g for Matrix HQ that'd be "Matrix Space" or whatever, what usecase would require multiple of these and how would a UX look for a Room which claims 100 spaces?

Reviewer 5: The usecase that came up is if one room should be a hidden member of multiple spaces. Hidden membership is defined in this MSC by having a parent set, but the space not a child. So, to be a hidden member of multiple spaces you'd have to have multiple parents.

Author: True. i'd missed that use case. Fixing...

Author: done in 91fe7a79

This structure means that rooms can end up with multiple parents. This implies
that the room will appear multiple times in the room list hierarchy.

In a typical hierarchy, we expect *both* parent->child and child->parent
relationships to exist, so that the space can be discovered from the room, and
vice versa. Occasions when the relationship only exists in one direction
include:

 * User-curated lists of rooms: in this case the space will not be listed as a
   parent of the room.

 * "Secret" rooms: rooms where the admin does not want the room to be
   advertised as part of a given space, but *does* want the room to form part
   of the hierarchy of that space for those in the know.

Cycles in the parent->child and child->parent relationships are *not*
permitted, but clients (and servers) should be aware that they may be
encountered, and ignore the relationship rather than recursing infinitely.

### Default children

The `default` flag on a child listing allows a space admin to list the
"default" sub-spaces and rooms in that space. This means that when a user joins
the parent space, they will automatically be joined to those default
children.

> XXX implement this on the client or server?

Reviewer 32: In my view leaving it to server to require participants of a space to be on the matching default rooms would open a big can of worms:
- Is this "default" a one-shot deal, only applicable when the user joins the space the first time? All these really questions really hinge on the answer to that question being "no, it's always enforced by the server". (If the answer is "yes", then the argument of "default" enforcement being a desirable property doesn't really hold, because it's not enforced.)
- When has the user joined a space? Before or after joining all default-join rooms? Note that this can sometimes take a considerable time.
- What happens if a join to any of the default room fail? Does the join to the space itself also fail? Does the user then automatically part from the rooms it joined successfully?
- Should user see any messages from any rooms before the join to the space has completed?
- What happens when a new room is set as default in the space?
- What happens when a user is removed from a room that is a default? Is it impossible, or does it automatically imply removal from the space as well? How do permissions to remove from a room/space relate to this? Also banning can happen per-room.

I feel it would be a lot smoother sailing spec- and implementation-wise if "default" was just informative to the user. Then the joining and parting default or non-default rooms would work the same way, except clients would manage the sequence of operations.

> XXX implement this on the client or server?

Author: we're doing it on the client, to let the client steer the process (using batch joins to speed things up if needed) as it sees fit, based on its UI requirements.

Clients could display the default children in the room list whenever the space
appears in the list.

### Long description

We would like to allow spaces to have a long description using rich
formatting. This will use a new state event type `m.room.description` (with
empty `state_key`) whose content is the same format as `m.room.message` (ie,
contains a `msgtype` and possibly `formatted_body`).

TODO: this could also be done via pinned messages. Failing that

> `m.room.description` should probably be a separate MSC.

Reviewer 35: There is an MSC for that now (started separately): https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2875

Reviewer 3: thanks; removed this section in 469b64c5 since it's now orthogonal to spaces.

> `m.room.description` should probably be a separate MSC.

Reviewer 5: There is a separate MSC for this here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2875

> `m.room.description` should probably be a separate MSC.

Reviewer 3: indeed, removed in 469b64c5cdfa212c548b3594402cb4ea42744417

### Managing power levels via spaces

TODO: much of this is orthogonal to the headline feature of "spaces", and

> should be moved to a separate MSC.

Reviewer 35: I do agree there. I think the general design of this MSC looks pretty good, until you get to power_levels. I would prefer it, if that part could be worked on independently and that one could submit competing proposals, so that the merits of one over the other can be discussed independently.

One use-case for spaces is to help manage power levels across a group of
rooms. For example: "Jim has just joined the management team at my company. He
should have moderator rights across all of the company rooms."

Since the event-authorisation rules cannot easily be extended to consider
membership in other rooms, we must map any changes in space membership onto
real `m.room.power_levels` events.

#### Extending the power_levels event

We now have a mix of manually- and automatically- maintained power-level
data. To support this, we extend the existing `m.room.power_levels` event to
add an `auto_users` key:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.power_levels",
    "content": {
        "users": {
            "@roomadmin:example.com": 100
        },
        "auto_users": {

>             "@spaceuser1:example.org": 50

Reviewer 35: While so far this hasn't been an issue, I think with spaces you will run into event size limits here. Just adding a community with 10 000 members to the mapping will add 10 000 userids here. Quoting the spec:

> The complete event MUST NOT be larger than 65535 bytes

So if each user has a 4 char mxid, this will put us over the limit. I think spaces should scale to 100 000 users.

Reviewer 5: How about leave out `users` (and `auto_users`) from the `m.room.power_level` state event, and then set an `m.room-power_level` with the state key the mxid and the content

```json
{
  "user": 100,
  "auto_user": 50
}
```

That way we make sure that we completely decouple the infinitly-growing object structure and thus truly allow rooms of unlimited sizes

Author: ooh, i like that.

Reviewer 3: this thread now migrated to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962#discussion_r557004325

        }
    }
}
```

A user's power level is then specified by an entry in *either* `users` or
`auto_users`. Where a user appears in both sections, `users` takes precedence.

The new `auto_users` key is maintained by a bot user, as described below.

`auto_users` is subject to all of the same authorization checks as the existing
`users` key (see https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules,
paragraphs 10a, 10d, 10e).

This change necessitates a new room version.

#### Representing the mapping from spaces to power levels

The desired mapping from spaces to power levels is defined in a new state event
type, `m.room.power_level_mappings`. The content should contain a `mappings`

> key which is an ordered list, for example:

Reviewer 35: Is that event sent in the child room or in the space?

Author: child

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.power_level_mappings",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "mappings": [
            {
                "space": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
                "power_level": 50
            },
            {
                "space": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
                "power_level": 1
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a new `m.room.power_levels` event would be generated whenever
the membership of either `!mods` or `!users` changes. If a user is in both

> spaces, `!mods` takes priority because that is listed first.

Reviewer 35: This basically implements role based permissions via group membership. This means you will needs separate spaces to define different groups of users instead of being able to define permissions inside the group, by assigning everyone a role/powerlevel. I would prefer it, if I could assign who is admin or not on the space level and inherit that to all children. I don't think I see that listed in alternatives?

Reviewer 5: Sadly it are only fake role-based permissions, as it still underlyingly maps to PLs.

Perhaps it makes sense to look more closely at #2812 before continuing here much?

If `mappings` is not a list, the whole event is ignored. Any entries in the list
which do not match the expected format are ignored.

#### Implementing the mapping

When a new room is created, the server implicitly adds a "room admin bot" to
the room, with the maximum power-level of any of the initial users.
(Homeservers should implement this "bot" internally, rather than requiring

> separate software to be installed.)

Reviewer 19: Presuming this means room and not space-room, it should probably account for existing rooms being added to a space-room

Reviewer 3: sorry, what do you mean?

Reviewer 19: If you create a room, assign me admin, then leave/your server dies. I then add that room to a Space. I can't make your server's space-bot manage it for me. The paragraph only states the case for new rooms being put into Spaces, not for existing rooms.

Reviewer 3: note that a room being "in" the space is orthogonal to having access controls based on that space (neither necessarily implies the other).

beyond that: yes, but isn't this the same discussion as https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r530962239?

> It is proposed that this "admin bot" use the special user ID with empty

Reviewer 19: So given that the admin bot is operated by the homeserver of the space-room admin which added the room to the space-room, wouldn't that mean massive inconsistency if the admin-ship of the space-room is spread amongst multiple servers and if one of those servers went down then partial/total permissions sync breakage with no proposed recovery?

Reviewer 30: I think the admin bot is operated by the room which created the room, as it is said line 273.

Reviewer 19: How would that work given

+ existing rooms can be added to Spaces, those rooms may originate from servers which no longer exist
+ the server which creates the room can still cease to exist and thus that room now being broken

Reviewer 30: Good questions, I have no idea :D

No matter where the bot is heberged, it could go down. I think we need a way for room's admin to setup a new one. This is actually just inviting the bot and giving it a power level 100. You could invite the one on your HS (assuming you trust your own HS).

Maybe this whole HS's admin bot should be specified alongside this one.

Reviewer 3: as @erdnaxeli says, the admin bot is part of the HS of the room creator.

and yes, if that server goes away, we have a problem. The solution probably amounts to having more than one admin bot in the room, which in turn means having good answers to "how do they decide which one should actually do the work". Whether the extra bots get automatically added whenever a user on another server is granted PL100, or requiring an explicit operation as @erdnaxeli suggests, is open to debate.

(I also think, though it's not written here, that the idea was that if the room creator left the room, so would the admin bot, to avoid accumulating rooms on the server where there are no real users.)

Reviewer 36: it seems to me that there is no good way to actually synchronize the permissions and room state across multiple rooms, but maybe we should rethink if that's actually necessary. would it work to simply introduce inheritance so that when looking up permissions and power levels it would defer to the parent room (with the ability to override that per child room)?

Reviewer 3: @ashkitten I'm not quite sure what you're suggesting, but it sounds a bit like the dismissed idea at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772/files#diff-cdaa2b5bfe73f40db1903d17b1d242d8caa54d4af81e78e0396a369bcd9a1b90R304-R312?

Reviewer 35: One of the biggest issues with current groups is, that they are bound to a specific server. spaces via rooms was supposed to fix that, at least someone may have said that at some point. Binding the power_level manipulation to a single server again, sounds like a step in the wrong direction. When you add multiple bots on multiple servers, you then run into the issue, that you need to do conflict resolution. Which means you are basically implementing state res a level above normal state res. I think it would be much more natural to extend state res to work across multiple rooms instead in a few specific cases. Yes, that is complicated, but it gives you a lot more tools to work with and can be useful for community only join rules as well. Otherwise you don't really need the bot user, you could just as well implement all of this clientside without reserving special IDs (well, for the most part, admins would need to join all rooms).

Reviewer 3: > I think it would be much more natural to extend state res to work across multiple rooms instead in a few specific cases. 

natural maybe, but would absolutely annihilate our chances of landing this feature within the next year. Seriously, I'm pretty sure getting state-res working across rooms would be an entire PhD thesis in its own right.

If people want to take on that research, I would be very interested to read the outcome. Meanwhile, I'm not prepared to block Spaces on a feature that would take *months* of research. We need to work with the tools we have available today and that absolutely excludes cross-room state-res/event-auth. This is simply not up for debate.

In any case, this suggestion is off-topic for this comment thread, which is about "where does the bot run", not "how can we completely change the proposal so you don't need a bot".

Reviewer 37: > So given that the admin bot is operated by the homeserver of the space-room admin which added the room to the space-room, wouldn't that mean massive inconsistency if the admin-ship of the space-room is spread amongst multiple servers and if one of those servers went down then partial/total permissions sync breakage with no proposed recovery?

Probably, unless the bot would exist on all participating servers. The problem then would be: what happens if the bots disagree?

If the bots **don't** exist on all participating homeservers, MSC1772 is really nothing more than a more complex `/r0/groups` in the spec.

Author: the bot is just used to keep PLs updated based on group memberships (which is a separate feature to the core spaces proposal anyway, and should be split out into a separate MSC - we only wrote it in one place to ensure it was considered when doing the core MSC).  To say that MSC1772 is "just `/groups`" if the PL-management bot sits on a single server is completely wrong (`/groups` doesn't even have PL management).

> When you add multiple bots on multiple servers, you then run into the issue, that you need to do conflict resolution. Which means you are basically implementing state res a level above normal state res.

Yes, if you end up with multiple servers doing PL-management, you need some way of conflict resolution.  However, this could be as simple as a social mechanism: if the admins of a room decide they want `@:matrix.org` rather than `@:example.com` to expand out the PLs, then they could make give the right bot power to do so.  This feels like a perfectly practical pragmatic solution that avoids us being sucked into the complexity of cross-room state res.

Reviewer 35: >  However, this could be as simple as a social mechanism: if the admins of a room decide they want @:matrix.org rather than @:example.com to expand out the PLs, then they could make give the right bot power to do so. This feels like a perfectly practical pragmatic solution that avoids us being sucked into the complexity of cross-room state res.

I guess that is a good point. In theory, as long as an admin on server B still exists and they have admin capabilities in all rooms, they should be able to change the group bot in all rooms, even if server A goes down. It does have the annoying side-effects of permission managements across rooms being broken until you notice A is down and I'm not really fond of that. At the small server scale servers often go down and there is not really one reliable server you can trust, unless you add one of the bigger ones. Those cases are at least recoverable though, while multiple bots have a few unrecoverable edge cases. For the first iteration that is probably completely fine and if it turns out to be an issue, since it doesn't need a lot of invasive changes to implement, it should be replaceable with a better solution, if someone can come up with one.

  yet is fundamental to the security of Matrix.

  In short, we believe such a change would require significant research and
  modelling. A solution based on such a foundation could not practically be
  implemented in the near future.

* Rather than defining the mapping in the room, define a template power-levels
  event in a parent space, which will be inherited by all child rooms. For example:

  ```js
  {
      "type": "m.space.child_power_levels",
      "state_key": "",
      "content": {
          // content as per regular power_levels event
      }
  }
  ```

  Problem 1: No automated mapping from space membership to user list, so the
  user list would have to be maintained manually. On the other hand, this
  could be fine in some situations, where we're just using the space to group
  together rooms, rather than as a user list.

  Problem 2: No scope for nuance, where different rooms have slightly
  different PLs.

  Problem 3: what happens to rooms where several spaces claim it as a child?
  They end up fighting?

  Problem 4: Doesn't allow for random room admins to delegate their PLs to a
  space without being admins in that space.

> * To implemplement the mapping, we require any user who is an admin in the

Reviewer 10: The more I think about it, the more I feel that this - with some improvements - is a much better solution than the current proposal. It makes a lot of sense for powerlevel changes in rooms to be made by the person who *actually* made them in the space, much more sense than an anonymous bot user, IMO. It's also much easier to reason about.

It would also remove the need for spaces-as-roles from a powerlevels perspective (hopefully this can be eliminated for join rules in some way as well!), and make all the hard questions regarding whose homeserver is authorative for the bot user, completely obsolete.

Those authority questions in particular are not ones where I expect anyone to have a *good* answer any time soon, because - as I believe someone else pointed out in another thread - we will effectively just be reinventing a second layer of stateres there. I don't think that is desirable, especially considering the expressed desire to avoid changing the stateres algorithm due to its fragility.

An additional benefit of this approach, is that there is a semantically obvious way to copy over default powerlevel *requirements* too, not just user-powerlevel assignments. This doesn't seem to be part of the PL sync proposal yet, but IMO should be.

In terms of API design, a 'synchronized powerlevel change' can be expressed either as a regular powerlevel change on the space, or as a special operation / event type. I don't yet have a strong preference for either, and would be interested in arguments for/against either.

The situation of "cannot synchronize PLs to rooms that the person does not have access in" is IMO sufficiently handled by simply making it an error condition to apply synced PL changes to a space without having the necessary access in all child rooms, with an optional "then just do it for the rooms where it's possible" flag. This allows for eg. a "you do not have permission to update all rooms, do you want to continue anyway?" UI.

That having been said, once the PLs have been manually synchronized across rooms *once*, by each room's admins, it should from that point on be self-sustaining; any space-wide PL change that allows a new admin to change PLs, will also grant that new admin those permissions for rooms. Therefore, "cannot change in all rooms" should be a rare occurrence.

This also addresses the "what if someone is using it for a personal room collection" usecase, as in those circumstances the user simply won't be able to synchronize PL changes across those rooms *unless* they have the needed PL within those rooms; in which case they can still choose to do so "where possible", following the aforementioned UI.

To address the main objections here:

The problem of Bob not wanting to be a member of all such rooms, is pretty easy to to address: simply make "being a member of a room" not a prerequisite for setting powerlevels in a room *at all*. This requires a new room version, but only requires a change in authorization rules, *not* in the stateres algorithm, which makes it a low-risk change.

Likewise, since powerlevel and other permission changes are *already* gated by powerlevel restrictions anyway, and so would normally not be creatable by someone who doesn't have some sort of prior reputation in a room, permitting permission change events from non-joined users would be a safe change.

I'm thinking specifically of making the following change in the authorization rules, changing:

> If the sender's current membership state is not `join`, reject.

... to:

> If the sender's current membership is `join`, allow. If the sender's current membership is `leave` or `invite`, *and* type is `m.room.power_levels`, allow. Otherwise, reject.

(Further permission change events, like `m.room.history_visibility`, may also be worth rolling into this if synchronizing those is desirable too.)

The problem of Bob generating PLs every time someone comes and goes from the space... is this really a problem? Wouldn't the set of members with any non-default powerlevels at all normally be pretty limited, with those powerlevels being normally assigned? It does not seem necessary to me to specify powerlevels for every user which did not explicitly receive a special one.

The problem of people not being able to mirror a space - is that really true? As far as I can tell, that's precisely what this approach *would* allow for, and with sensible PL propagation semantics.

  space (ie, anyone who has permission to change the access rights in the
  space) to also be admins and members of any child rooms.

  Say Bob is an admin in #doglovers and makes a change that should be
  propagated to all children of that space. His server is then responsible
  for generating a power-levels event on his behalf for each room.

  Problem 1: Bob may not want to be a member of all such rooms.

  Problem 2: It will feel odd that Bob's user is seen to be generating PL
  events every time someone comes and goes from the space.

  Problem 3: It doesn't allow users to set up their own rooms to mirror a

>   space, without having any particular control in that space (though it is

Reviewer 38: What does mirroring a space mean?

Author: i'm unsure. @richvdh?

Reviewer 3: this thread now migrated to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962#discussion_r557000730

  disappears? The humans have to step in and create a new admin?

  Problem 2: Again it seems odd that these PL changes come from a single user.

* Is it possible to implement the mappings from multiple users, some of which
  may not have PL 100? After all it's possible to set rooms up so that you can
  change PL events without having PL 100.

  It gets horribly messy very quickly, where some admin users can make some
  changes. So some get supressed and then get made later anyway by a different
  admin user?

* Is it possble to apply finer-grained control to the
  `m.room.power_level_mappings` event than "you must be max(PL)"? Applying
  restrictions post-hoc (ie, having the admin bot ignore settings which were
  set by underpriviledged users) is an absolute minefield. It might be possible
  to apply restrictions at the point that the event is set, but it sounds
  fiddly and it's not clear there is a real use-case.

* This solution smells a bit funny because of the expansions (causing all the
  redundant mxids everywhere as the groups constantly get expanded every time
  something happens).

  * Could we could put a hash of the space membership in the PL instead of

>     expanding the wole list, so that servers have a way to check if they are

Reviewer 19: ```suggestion
    expanding the whole list, so that servers have a way to check if they are
```

            "users": {
                "@roomadmin:example.com": 100,
                "@spaceuser1:example.org": 50
            },
            "manual_users": {
                "@roomadmin:example.com": 100
            }
        }
    }
    ```

    ... or stored in a separate event. Clients would be responsible for updating
    both copies of the manually-assigned PLs on change.

    Problem: Requiring clients to make two changes feels fragile. What if they
    get it wrong? what if they don't know about the second copy because they
    haven't been designed to work in rooms in spaces?

  * Require that even regular PLs go through the automated mapper, by making
    them an explicit input to that mapper, for example with entries in the
    `m.room.power_level_mappings` event suggested above.

    Problem: Requires clients to distinguish between rooms where there is an
    automated mapper, and those where the client should manipulate the PLs
    directly. (Maybe that's not so bad? The presence of the `mappings` event
    should be enough? But still sucks that there are two ways to do the same
    thing, and clients which don't support spaces will get it wrong.)

> ### Restricting room membership based on space membership

Reviewer 10: This also feels like something that should be punted off to a separate MSC? It doesn't seem like a dependency to the core Spaces mechanism.

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of
their room based on the membership of spaces (for example, "members of the
#doglovers space can join this room without an invitation"<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>).

We could represent the allowed spaces with additional content in the
`m.room.join_rules` event. For example:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "public",

>         "allow": [

Reviewer 5: Again,  we might want to flesh out #2812 more, as, well, "access to a room" is a permission and we are re-implementing role-based permissions here by creating a bunch of empty rooms

join. Additionally, users who have received an explicit `invite` event are
allowed to join<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>. If the `allow` key is an
empty list (or not a list at all), no users are allowed to join without an
invite.

Unlike the regular `invite` join rule, the restriction cannot be enforced over
federation by event authorization, so servers in the room are trusted not to
allow invalid users to join.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

When a server receives a `/join` request from a client or a
`/make_join`/`/send_join` request from a server, the request should only be
permitted if the user has a valid invite or is in one of the listed spaces
(established by peeking).

XXX: redacting the join_rules above will reset the room to public, which feels dangerous?

A new room version is not absolutely required here, but may be advisable to
ensure that servers that do not support `allow` do not join the room
(and would also allow us to tweak the redaction rules to avoid the foot-gun).

#### Kicking users out when they leave the allowed space

XXX: this will probably be a future extension, rather than part of the initial

> implementation of `allow`.

Reviewer 38: This part feels weird to me. `m.room.join_rules` seems like it should govern joins, not existing room membership.

Reviewer 38: This thread was moved to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962#discussion_r557000283

In the above example, suppose `@bob:server.example` leaves `!users:example.org`:
they should be removed from the room. One option is to leave the departure up
to Bob's server `server.example`, but this places a relatively high level of trust
in that server. Additionally, if `server.example` were offline, other users in
the room would still see Bob in the room (and their servers would attempt to
send message traffic to it).

Instead, we make the removal the responsibility of the room's admin bot (see
above): the bot is expected to peek into any spaces in `allow` and kick
any users who are members of the room and leave the union of the allowed
spaces.

(XXX: should users in a space be kicked when that space is removed from the
`allow` list? We think not, by analogy with what happens when you switch
the join rules from `public` to `invite`.)

> One problem here is that it will lead to users who joined via an invite being

Reviewer 5: This might actually be desirable. better kick, and if it was a mistake, bob can be re-invited

One way to of achieving this would be to create a separate space for the
private members - e.g. have `#foo:matrix.org` and `#foo-private:matrix.org`.
`#foo-private:matrix.org` is set up with `m.room.history_visibility` to not to
allow peeking; you have to be joined to see the members.

### Flair

("Flair" is a term we use to describe a small badge which appears next to a
user's displayname to advertise their membership of a space.)

The flair image for a group is given by the room avatar. (In future it might
preferable to use hand-crafted small resolution images: see
[matrix-doc#1778](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1778).

One way this might be implemented is:

 * User publishes the spaces they wish to announce on their profile
   ([MSC1769](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1769)
   as an `m.flair` state event: it lists the spaces which they are advertising.

 * When a client wants to know the current flair for a set of users (i.e.
   those which it is currently displaying in the timeline), it peeks the
   profile rooms of those users. (Ideally there would be an API to support
   peeking multiple rooms at once to facilitate this.)

>  * The client must check that the user is *actually* a member of the advertised

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
 * The client and the user's homeserver must check that the user is *actually* a member of the advertised
```

Reviewer 3: flair is pretty hypothetical currently, so this is moot, but: why dos the homeserver care?

Reviewer 17: To actually prevent advertising flairs that user does not possess.

Reviewer 3: you're suggesting that the server be responsible for filtering any `m.flair` events in a user's profile, at the time that profile is served to clients? I think that could be problematic, because even if the user was in the space at the time that the profile was served to a client, they might have since left, and it would be difficult for servers to track that information and then send it on to clients.

In any case, it seems pointless that *both* servers and clients should do this check.

Reviewer 17: > it seems pointless that both servers and clients should do this check

That is deliberate, to prevent clients from trusting the servers beyond that is required by the security model, and servers from trusting the clients in any manner.

Reviewer 3: if clients need to do the check anyway, what is the value of servers doing it too?

Reviewer 17: The client check for the correctness at the time of writing to it, the server to check again for TTWTTR issues, and the server check at the time of reading and removing the disallowed values to enforce the flair-membership constraint.

Reviewer 3: > TTWTTR

please could you stop using meaningless acronyms? I'm getting tired of second-guessing what you mean.

Reviewer 17: It was meant as "time of write to time of read", i.e. TOCTOU.

Reviewer 3: > TOCTTOU

nope, no idea about that one either.

Have you read https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2801 by the way? I think it conflicts with what you are trying to suggest here.

Reviewer 17: TOCTTU: time of check to time of use
The server may also make use of flair data (external integration management by plug-ins etc.), therefore it should ensure it is well formed. Not all data require such guarantees hence we can list those that do (the list would be short). All other data is going to remain untrusted.

Reviewer 3: ok, I think it's reasonably obvious that if the server ends up making use of flair data directly, it needs to verify that data.

I think we're done on this thread.

## Dependencies

 * [MSC1840](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840) for room
   types.

 * [MSC2753](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2753) for
   effective peeking over the C/S API.

 * [MSC2444](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2444) (or similar)
   for effective peeking over Federation.

These dependencies are shared with profiles-as-rooms
([MSC1769](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1769)).

## Security considerations

* The peek server has significant power. For example, a poorly chosen peek
  server could lie about the space membership and add an
  `@evil_user:example.org`.

* The `allow` feature for `join_rules` places increased trust in the servers in the
  room. We consider this acceptable: if you don't want evil servers randomly
  joining spurious users into your rooms, then a) don't let evil servers in
  your room in the first place, b) don't use `allow` lists, given the
  expansion increases the attack surface anyway by letting members in other
  rooms dictate who's allowed into your room.

## Tradeoffs

* If the membership of a space would be large (for example: an organisation of

>   several thousand people), this membership has to copied entirely into the

Author: ```suggestion
  several thousand people), this membership has to be copied entirely into the
```

their room based on the membership of spaces (for example, "members of the
#doglovers space can join this room without an invitation"<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>).

We could represent the allowed spaces with additional content in the
`m.room.join_rules` event. For example:

```js
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "public",
        "allow": [
            {
                "space": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
            },
            {
                "space": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"],
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

The `allow` key applies a restriction to the `public` join rule, so that
only users satisfying one or more of the requirements should be allowed to
join. Additionally, users who have received an explicit `invite` event are
allowed to join<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>. If the `allow` key is an
empty list (or not a list at all), no users are allowed to join without an
invite.

Unlike the regular `invite` join rule, the restriction cannot be enforced over
federation by event authorization, so servers in the room are trusted not to

> allow invalid users to join.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

Reviewer 3: I was struggling to remember why we decided it was better to start with `join_rule: public` and lock it down, rather than `join_rule: invite` and open it up.

I think the answer amounts to: from the perspective of the [auth rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules), the expected behaviour is the same as that of `join_rule: public`, because the `allow` restrictions cannot be enforced post-hoc.

So, from the auth rules' point of view, `public` makes more sense. From the C-S API's point of view, `invite` makes more sense. I'm a bit worried that this is going to be very confusing for everybody.

I wonder if, for clarity as much as anything else, we should introduce a different `join_rule` - say, `restricted` - to reflect the fact that what we have is a cross between `invite` and `public`? in this world:
 * `public`: anyone can join, subject to `ban` and `server_acls`, as today
 * `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, as today
 * `restricted`: the same as `public` from the perspective of the auth rules, but with the additional caveat that servers are expected to check the `allow` rules before generating a `join` event (whether for a local or a remote user).

Since we're talking about needing a new room version for this anyway, it seems like a reasonable thing to do?

Reviewer 3: oops, wrong MSC

"`/r0/groups`".

This proposal suggests a new approach where spaces are themselves represented
by rooms, rather than a custom first-class entity.  This requires few server
changes, other than better support for peeking (see Dependencies below). The
existing `/r0/groups` API would be deprecated in Synapse and remain
unspecified.

## Proposal

Each space is represented by its own room, known as a "space-room". The rooms
within the space are determined by state events within the space-room.

Spaces are referred to primarily by their alias, for example
`#foo:matrix.org`.

Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the `m.room.type`
of `m.space` (see [MSC1840](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840)).

We introduce an `m.space.child` state event type which defines the rooms within
the group: A `present: true` key is included to distinguish from a deleted
state event. Something like:

```json
{
    "type": "m.space.child",
    "state_key": "#room1:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true
    }
}

{
    "type": "m.space.child",
    "state_key": "#room2:example.com",
    "contents": {
        "present": true,

>         "autojoin": true   # TODO: what does this mean?

Author: the idea was to encourage clients to autojoin the child if they join the parent.

in practice, I think we need richer autojoin semantics - a space admin should be able to force a user to join rooms and subspaces, if that user has joined the parent space.

`#foo:matrix.org`.

Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the `m.room.type`
of `m.space` (see

> [MSC1840](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840)). XXX nobody has

Author: I think the concern is that you might want to mark certain rooms as "this type of room is for data, not IM", and this is the way of doing so.  I'm ambivalent on whether users are allowed to talk in space-rooms though, and if they're given names like #space:matrix.org i'd kinda expect to have the option to talk there (unless the admins make it read only, and thus just a container for child rooms/spaces)

Reviewer 3: > I think the concern is that you might want to mark certain rooms as "this type of room is for data, not IM"

the question is what you (as a client or server) would do with this information.

Reviewer 3: resolving this thread in favour of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r434438269

Space-rooms are distinguished from regular messaging rooms by the `m.room.type`
of `m.space` (see [MSC1840](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1840)).

> We introduce an `m.space.child` state event type, which defines the rooms

Author: Something that came up when working on UX with @nadonomy today: what if we want some of the children of the space to be secret? for instance, a company might have a company-wide space, and want to nest some teams and their rooms within it that you should only know about on a need-to-know basis.  Can it be sufficient for the space and room to point to its parent, without its parent pointing to the children?

Reviewer 39: This is absolutely vital when it comes to modern usage in chat platforms like Slack and Discord where you need these types of channels. If Matrix can bring in these core features, it has potential to migrate many of their users who haven't been able to find a self-hosted or secure alternative.

Reviewer 3: secret children are now covered in the proposal.

}
```

XXX if we use aliases here, and we are using it to maintain a tree of rooms in

> the room list, what happens when the alias gets repointed and we don't know

Author: i guess the client could cache the alias and re-resolve it occasionally?

Reviewer 6: I think we should use room IDs, it would make so much more sense. A group should contain a specific room, not a pointer to some room at the other end of an alias. Using aliases would also mean that unexpected people could edit which rooms are in a group by repointing their aliases, even when those people don't have permission to change the state on the group room.

Reviewer 3: I'm minded to agree with @cloudrac3r here. Everything is much better defined with room ids, even if we end up having to jump over some hurdles to support room upgrades.

Reviewer 5: To add to the discussion, not every room might have an alias that you want to add to the space. For example, if the room is short-lived, or you only want the space as a whole discoverable, or if you want to replace tags with spaces, you gotta add rooms to a space by id, rather than alias.

Reviewer 3: the proposal now uses room ids everywhere.

about it? Maybe room IDs would be better, though the interaction with room
upgrades would need considering.

XXX Rooms also need to be able to advertise related spaces, so that users can
discover other, related, rooms.

> XXX We also want to be have "secret" rooms within a heirarchy: do this with

Author: ```suggestion
+ XXX We also want to be have "secret" rooms within a hierarchy: do this with
```

> either a "parent" state in the child, or possibly by hashing the room id?

Author: n.b. that if a room is to be secret within multiple spaces, it needs to support multiple parents.  only one of these would be the canonical parent though (the space you get teleported into if you /join or /peek that room)

    automatically joined by members of the space: see
    [below](#auto-joined-children).

 2. Separately, rooms can claim parents via the `m.space.parent` state
    event.

    Similar to `m.space.child`, the `state_key` is the ID of the parent space,
    and the content should contain a `via` key which gives a list of candidate
    servers that can be used to join the parent.

    ```js
    {
        "type": "m.space.parent",
        "state_key": "!space:example.com",
        "content": {
            "via": ["example.com"],

>             "present": true,

Reviewer 19: Given that `via` is used to determine removal, do we still need `present`?

   different PLs.

   Problem 3: what happens to rooms where several spaces claim it as a child?
   They end up fighting?

   Problem 4: Doesn't allow for random room admins to delegate their PLs to a
   space without being admins in that space.

 * Option 2: Express the desired PLs as state in the child rooms

   This will need to be an ordered list, so that overlaps have defined behaviour:

   ```js
   {
       "type": "m.room.power_level_mappings",
       "state_key": "",
       "content": {
           "mappings": [
               {
                   "users": ["@superuser:matrix.org"],
                   "power_level": 100,
               },
               {
                   "spaces": ["#mods:example.org"],
                   "power_level": 50,
               }
           ]
       }
   }
   ```

   The intention would be that an automated process would peek into
   `#mods:example.org` and

   Problem 1: possibly hard to map onto a comprehensible UI?

   Problem 2: scope for getting wildly out of sync?

   Question: is it safe to use an alias to refer to a space here? What happens
   if the alias gets repointed and we don't notice?

#### Propagating changes into rooms

>  * Push-based:

Author: ```suggestion
* Push-based options:
```

   * We require any user who is an admin in the space (ie, anyone who has
     permission to change the access rights in the space) to also be admins

>      and members of any child rooms.

Author: I don't think this is specific to child rooms - we could be trying to push changes to any room which is using this space to define an ACL.

Reviewer 3: sorry yes, I was using "child rooms" loosely to mean "any room which is somehow subscribing to a space for PL updates" here. Will attempt to clarify.

     Say Bob is an admin in #doglovers and makes a change that should be
     propagated to all children of that space. His server is then responsible
     for generating a power-levels event on his behalf for each room.

>      Problem: Bob may not want to be a member of all such rooms.

Author: I think this is the least magical one, and most familiar one today. If a human wants to enforce permissions on rooms in a space, then they should be in those rooms to enforce them.  They can always use an admin role user if they don't want a human to do so, and said role user could then (e.g.) also be used as an audit bot if needed, etc.  The problem of "omg our admin turned off his server" is then a social one to fix; it's up to the humans to assign enough admins and pass the admin torch around as needed.

     the changes into child rooms. It observes changes made in the parent space
     and performs the necessary copying actions.

     Problem: Control is now centralised on the homeserver of the admin bot. If
     that server goes down, changes are no longer propagated correctly.

   * We make it possible to specify several "group admin bot" users as above,
     on different servers. All of them must have membership and admin in all
     child rooms. Between them, they keep the child rooms in sync.

     Problem: How do the bots decide which will actually make the changes?
       * Maybe a random delay is good enough to avoid too much glare?
       * Or the humans nominate an "active" bot, with the others acting as
         standbys until they are promoted?

 * Pull-based: the user that created the relationship (or rather, their
   homeserver) is responsible for copying access controls into the room.

   This has the advantage that users can set up their own spaces to mirror a
   space, without having any particular control in that group. (XXX: Is that
   actually a useful feature, at least as far as PLs are concerned?)

>    Problem: What do you do if the admin who sets ip the PL relationship

Author: ```suggestion
Problem: What do you do if the admin who sets up the PL relationship
```

   disappears?  Again, either the humans have to step in and create a new
   admin, or maybe we can have multiple admins with random backoff?

   Problem 2: What if the group server you are peeking to to maintain state is
   unreachable? You could specify multiple vias for different servers via which
   you can peek?

All of the above solutions share the common problem that if the admin user
(human or virtual) loses membership or admin rights in the child room, then
the room will get out of sync.

### Membership restrictions

XXX: this section still in progress

Another desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict
membership of their room based on the membership of spaces<sup
id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup> (and by implication, when a user leaves the required
space, they should be ejected from the room). For example, "Any members of the
#doglovers space can join this room".

> ### Automated joins

Author: We should probably have automated kicks too. "ex-staff members should automatically leave all the rooms of that company when they leave the company".  This could be done symmetrically to automated joins - i'd shove "force-join: true" and "force_part: true" on the `m.space.child` in question.

We then warn the user that joining this space will mean they'll get force-join/parted around the place.  Their server would then autoaccept the resulting invites.

Author: oh, i now see that "membership restrictions" was trying to cover that. perhaps it should be renamed "Automated parts"?

Reviewer 3: I think this is adequately covered in "Membership restrictions".

cut deterministically.  For instance, if space A points to space B as a child
but space B also points to space A as a child, then clients must be consistent
on whether A is shown in the UI as the parent of B (or vice versa).  Therefore
when a client needs to consistently visualise a space hierarchy, it should
check for loops in parent->child or child->parent relationships and ignore the
cycle by cutting it such that the oldest space-room is the root (i.e. oldest
parent). 'Oldest' means the room whose `m.room.create` event has the
numerically smallest `origin_server_ts`.  If the oldest rooms are precisely
the same age, we select the root as the room with the smallest `room_id`
(lexicographically comparing the Unicode code-points of the `room_id` string).

> https://hackmd.io/eQpyqCcRR-Gj-SWZcD-Fxg shows an algorithm for doing so.

Reviewer 15: can we include the algorithm in the MSC please? This is highly likely to not age well...

Author: i guess we can shove it in as an appendix. but it's just an implementation hint, imo

Reviewer 15: indeed: just looking to dump it essentially verbatim into the MSC so it doesn't bitrot. The spec wouldn't include it necessarily.

Author: I'll dump it in, but first I need to understand why the implementation cares ordering by the number of incoming edges before ordering by ts... paging @BillCarsonFr

Reviewer 28: It's to give more weight to nodes that are real roots as defined by user.
If not the algorithm could start anywhere in hierarchy and break the cycle in a strange way.

````

                                  ┌────┐
                                  │ S1 │
                          ┌───────┴────┴───────┐
                          │                    │
                          │                    │
                          │                    │
    ┌──────────────────►┌─▼─┐               ┌──▼──┐
    │                   │   │               │     │
    │             ┌─────┴───┘             ┌─┴─────┴──┐
    │             │                       │          │
    │             │edge2                  │          │
    │             │                       │          │
  edge1         ┌─▼──┐                  ┌─▼──┐     ┌─▼─┐
    │           │S0  │                  │    │     │   │
    │       ┌───┴────┴──┐               └────┘     └───┘
    │       │           │
    │       │           │
    │       │           │
    │       │           │
    │     ┌─▼─┐     ┌───▼─┐
    └─────┤   │     │     │
          └───┘     └─────┘

````
Here S0 is older than S1
If using Nie edge1 will be broken, if not edge2 will be

Not sure what would be the best way to create the most 'logically balanced tree', we could go a lot farther and detect all cycles then age the edges based on child and/or parent state event age, then decide to break the last added edge. But it's a lot more complex.

TL;DR; the idea was to add more weight to real roots, and not rely only on age given that i can create a new space to enclose and old one. But no mathematical proof that it's that better

Reviewer 23: Per the conversation in #matrix-spec and the concern from @richvdh, I've removed the bit about the algorithm for now. After experimentation, a separate MSC can be provided which describes a recommended algorithm, if this is necessary.

 * What happens if somebody defines a cycle? (It's probably fine, but anything
   interpreting the relationships needs to be careful to limit recursion.)

> XXX seems we need to un-de-scope this.

Author: My hunch is that we can avoid propagating access controls from parents to children or vice versa.  Instead rooms should be set up with whatever explicit access controls they require (leveraging spaces if needed).
